# Epilogue

---



Epilogue

Update, Upheaval, Game-Changer

The Q Factor on the Football Field… and Off

A
s we finished the hardcover edition of this book, we offered our answer to the ubiquitous question of the game: the favorite columnist-talk-radio-pundit-blogger-ESPN-Bleacher-Report-SI-barstool-tailgater question—
Is the game changing?
 We said, loud and clear, yes! In lots of ways. Style. Scoring. Philosophy. Innovation. Ideas. Aggressiveness. Even politics and social values. We thought we’d answered the question once and for all. But we were wrong. When we wrote that, we had no idea how much more it would change in the following twelve months. The next change, the change we could never have anticipated, had nothing to do with pocket passers vs. mobile QBs, or an evolution to the college game, or taking a knee as a social statement. It was more. Way more and way bigger. Everything changed overnight. COVID-19 altered everything. It upended the world, all continents, all cities, 
all homes, all businesses, schools, travel, every activity on earth, every aspect of life. And of course, that includes sports. All sports. Everything. Every. Thing.

It seems, more than a year later, we are only just now beginning to see the slow return to relatively normal life.

But when it hit in full force, somehow, amazingly, persistently, sports and other forms of entertainment survived. In particular, in many ways, football even thrived. Fans couldn’t fill stadiums, but we could watch on television, on streaming devices, on smartphones; we could all follow on social media; we could call in to talk shows; we could view replays; we could play fantasy football… and fans did, in record numbers. Perhaps proving how hungry we were for diversion in the face of upheaval. Football, from backyard games to high school to Division I to the NFL, adapted. Fast. The last “normal” event on the NFL calendar was the Combine. From then on came masks, sanitizers, and social distancing, canceled college pro days, the first-ever virtual draft, distanced team meetings, altered locker rooms, minimized contact on the practice field, more individual workouts, no in-person pressers, closed facilities, Zoom calls, wrist trackers, daily testing, quarantined players, a canceled preseason, and, to say the least, very fluid rescheduling of games.

Each team adjusted in their own ways, some better than others, some not so good. The Browns played the Jets with six players quarantined, including all of its wide receivers; the Broncos faced the Saints with exactly zero quarterbacks, all four out with COVID, putting a wideout who played QB in college in charge; and the Ravens hit a league high of thirteen players out, plus a coach, resulting in their Steelers Thanksgiving game getting rescheduled 
from Thursday to Sunday, then Tuesday, then Wednesday (yes, the Browns, Broncos, and Ravens lost those games).

But one team handled the pandemic remarkably well—the Seattle Seahawks, perhaps a model for teams in other sports, and even for businesses, schools, you name it. How? Pete Carroll, whose philosophy is “always compete” or, as he says, “do things better than they have ever been done before,” turned following the protocols into a contest. He deputized Sam Ramsden, their director of player health and performance, to lead the team compliance and internal competition. Each position group worked as a team, measuring their adherence to the guidelines weekly, against the other position groups. Ramsden himself wore a T-shirt that said: Stay Negative or Stay Home. Everyone had N95 masks. Sanitizer was everywhere. The players were equipped with devices that kept tabs on how close players and other personnel were to each other and for what length of time—no less than six feet apart for no more than five to fifteen minutes. And every twelve minutes, throughout the facility, a bell rang signaling time to move on. Food was ordered by app from a delivery company. Travel to and from airports and games, usually in four buses, was spread out to seven. The team tapped nationally recognized health expert Dr. Vin Gupta, who was a regular on the cable news circuit and happened to work nearby at the University of Washington. Gupta hooked them up with a rapid virus test—under an hour. He said he could tell immediately that from Carroll to Ramsden to the whole organization, there were no virus deniers; they embraced the science and every tool to stay ahead of the disease. Since it was a competition, what was the final score? The league encountered more than seven hundred positive tests for 
COVID. The Seahawks had zero. Pretty good metrics for any game, especially one that serious. And by the way, the wide receivers won the intrateam contest.

Remarkably, despite the pandemic, the NFL completed its season, including playoffs and the Super Bowl. And Super Bowl LV was a world-class matchup. A battle of styles and generations. A showdown between ageless pocket passer Tom Brady and young maestro of mobility Patrick Mahomes. Brady was now a Tampa Bay Buccaneer, for the first time in his career 
not
 a New England Patriot, 
not
 being coached by the genius of Bill Belichick. Perhaps this would settle the career-long argument: Was the Patriots’ success due to Brady or Belichick? Mahomes, leading Kansas City to their second straight Super Bowl, was coming off a blazing 14-2 season of scrambling, dodging, ducking, side-arm passing, running, finding a way no matter what. It was to be the classic battle of drop back and execute vs. innovate on the fly. Different styles. Different abilities. Different play calling. And yes, even different generations. The quarterbacks were separated by nearly two decades. But both were ringing endorsements for the Q Factor.

Wait. Whoa. The Q Factor is supposed to be a collection of extrapolations to help 
predict
 who will be a top-level quarterback. How could Brady be a proof case of the Q Factor? Remember, he wasn’t predicted; he was a sixth-round pick almost missed entirely by the draft. True. But as we said earlier in the book, that wasn’t the fault of Brady’s college performance or that his talent didn’t come to fruition until he got to the NFL. It was more likely the myopia of old scouts using outdated data. They relied on the conventional wisdom that Tom only started half the games for a conservative, nonpassing offense at Michigan and couldn’t possibly perform at 
the NFL level. But “conventional wisdom” is almost always the beginning of a sentence that shows how unwise that wisdom is. If those scouts and GMs had dived headfirst into the real trends beneath the surface, the hours of game film, the repeated performances under pressure, the passion and self-assuredness, the hard data of being number one in the Big 10 in completion percentage, number one in passing efficiency, and even more yards per attempt than a guy named Drew Brees… 
if
 they’d looked harder, the extrapolations would have emerged.

And ironically, though with an opposite style, the same goes for Mahomes. He was drafted nine spots 
below
 Mitchell Trubisky. Why? Patrick was considered too much of a wild card on the field. Too much of a baseball pitcher. Too inventive. Too mobile. What do those even mean? Since when are being inventive and mobile bad things? How about just moving the ball down the field? In three college years, Trubisky had a respectable total of 5,201 yards gained. In the same three years, Mahomes had 12,097. More than double. That’s not a fluke. That’s a pattern. That’s an extrapolation. Or it should have been. Not to mention Patrick’s natural, easy leadership, cool under pressure, understated confidence, and ability to build team rapport. Those can also be extrapolated… 
if
 you dig deep enough. But to those scouts and their conventional wisdom, Trubisky “looked like a quarterback” more than Mahomes. To say the least, they were looking at the wrong stuff. But both Brady and Mahomes demonstrate that applied diligently, the extrapolations of the Q Factor can increase the outcomes of predicting future QB success enough to be the difference between winning and losing in the NFL.

The anticipation of the matchup was epic. The combination of 
our sports-starved world and the clash of generational talents created an event made in heaven. Who would prevail? The elusive, unstoppable, creative, option-on-option, run-pass-flick-flinging Patrick Mahomes? Or the master of the universe, the forever-young, smarter-with-age, true GOAT, Tom Brady? The smart money seemed to be on Kansas City and the youth of Mahomes. Every commentator offered some version of “Father Time is undefeated.” Las Vegas had the Chiefs as 3.5-point favorites. Tom was just too old.

How many ways can we say “wrong”? Brady and the Bucs were dazzling, brilliant, relentless, remarkable… pick your gushing adjectives. Brady threw as well or better than he ever had in his career. He hit his receivers over and over, long, short, medium, under pressure, you name it. And Rob Gronkowski, who came out of retirement at Brady’s request (though his thirty-one years make him practically a teenager compared to Brady’s forty-three), caught six passes, two for TDs. Running back Leonard Fournette had sixteen carries for eighty-nine yards and a TD. And the Bucs defense rose to the occasion to bottle up Mahomes, something few teams had done all year. They sacked him three times and picked him off twice. In fact, the Chiefs never got into the end zone. All of their points were on field goals. Final score: Bucs 31, Chiefs 9. Father Time, at least for the moment, was held at bay, if not defeated.

The Q Factor proved its predictive validity in Super Bowl LV. The game didn’t demonstrate that the pocket quarterback is better than the mobile QB. It didn’t verify that the drop-back style is better than the run-pass option. It didn’t show that age is superior to youth. It showed that the best talents reveal themselves early and over time, as recurrent trends. 
If
 you look hard enough and long 
enough at those trends, 
if
 you extrapolate, you can spot those traits in advance. You can predict.

Two of the best talents in football were on the field. Provable, projectable, documented patterns of talent and leadership. One won today. Maybe the other one would tomorrow. That’s the game of football.

The Q Factor worked in Super Bowl LV. Just as it did not only in the draft of 2018 but in the drafts of 2019 and 2020. And as it will likely do in 2021.

In 2019, Kyler Murray was taken number one overall, and he clearly seems to have the projectable trends to warrant the pick. In two NFL seasons with the Cardinals, he’s shown all the signs of living up to his potential, especially as they build a team around him. Extrapolations validated? Definitely. But in the same draft, Daniel Jones—largely on the strength of a good-to-good-plus performance at Duke (hardly a football powerhouse), coached by QB guru David Cutcliffe—moved up from what should have been deep in round one if not early in round two, to the number five pick… because of a bad case of that dangerous disease, team need. And it has shown in two mediocre seasons with the Giants. Extrapolations? They were a stretch at best. Then Dwayne Haskins, with only one real season at Ohio State, was vaulted to the number fifteen pick for Washington, again a severe case of need. Even against aging vets, Haskins couldn’t hold the starter’s job. Extrapolations? There just weren’t any, at least not any positive ones. In fact, the only real surprise of ’19 might have been Gardner Minshew, ignored until the sixth round. He showed upward trends in college, passed for some impressive numbers, and when he got to the NFL, he managed to win a few long-shot games for the Jaguars.

In 2020, Joe Burrow went first overall, and like with Kyler Murray, it was well warranted. Playing for Ohio State and then LSU, he lit up both the Big 10 and the SEC. Extrapolations? In passing, completion, rushing, leadership? Yes, yes, yes, and yes. The Q Factor at work. Then three more quarterbacks were taken in the first round: Tua Tagovailoa, Justin Herbert, and Jordan Love. Extrapolations? Maybe, maybe, and probably not. Based on a deeper dive into the game films, evidence, and trends, there may be one hidden gem in ’20: Jalen Hurts. He didn’t play much for the Eagles, but he has a high upside. He played three very good seasons at Alabama and finished with an absolutely dazzling year at Oklahoma—big passing numbers and big running numbers, and lots of wins. Extrapolations? Possibly overlooked.

What about 2021? Well, one thing is for sure. Need will rear its ugly head. Need is running rampant in the NFL, with owner-fan impatience at an all-time high. There’s no better proof than the off-season veteran QB action: Lions and Rams swapping Matt Stafford for Jared Goff, Wentz from the Eagles to the Colts, Mitchell Trubisky to the Bills to back up Josh Allen, Andy Dalton coming to the Bears for a year anyway, Deshaun Watson maybe being traded / maybe not, and Russell Wilson and Dak Prescott staying put despite rumors to the contrary.

Look at the teams in the draft with major quarterback needs: the Jaguars, who haven’t had truly great quarterback since Mark Brunell; the Jets, after choosing wishful thinking over extrapolations in taking Sam Darnold in 2018; the Falcons, who are getting ready to turn the corner on talented but aging Matt Ryan; the Panthers, who had already given up on Cam Newton a year ago; and Washington, having traded Dwayne Haskins and getting about all 
they could from veteran Alex Smith. That’s potentially five teams taking quarterbacks in the first round. The problem is, there aren’t five first-round-worthy quarterbacks to take. At least not according to the Q Factor. (That doesn’t mean five quarterbacks won’t be taken in the first round. It just means taking the fourth or fifth one will likely be a big reach.)

There is one guy who stands out as being as close to a sure thing as there is: Trevor Lawrence from Clemson is the strongest number one pick since Andrew Luck from Stanford. He has been an outstanding talent since middle school. Let that sink in: from around the age of fourteen. From then on, all the extrapolations are there, from completion percentage to total yards gained in the air or with his legs, to a track record of character. One anecdote the locals in Cartersville, Georgia, love to tell about Trevor says a lot (even if it’s been embellished a bit by the hometown fans). The story goes that Lawrence’s high school teammate, a receiver, was having a lousy day, just not hanging on to the ball. Late in the game, Lawrence led his team down the field and into scoring position. On the next play, he dropped back, and ignored two open targets, finally hitting the kid with the lousy day for the score. Trevor’s coach was not happy. He saw the wide-open targets, too, and he asked Lawrence what he could possibly have been thinking. Lawrence said his receiver needed the catch and they would need him going into the playoffs. Smart. Selfless. That’s leadership at a young age.

Okay, the number one pick will go to the Jaguars and a coaching staff that’s as good as they get: Urban Meyer, three-time College National Champion, now in his first year in the NFL; Darrell Bevell, offensive coordinator who hit high numbers with Matt Stafford at the Lions; and Brian Schottenheimer, passing coach, 
who helped Russell Wilson set records. Good pick, good coaches, good match.

But from there on, it’s all a crapshoot.

After the Jaguars, the Jets (looking to trade Darnold) have the number two pick, but now they have a wise GM in Joe Douglas and a very smart, very good new head coach in Robert Saleh. Despite the Jets’ QB “curse,” since the Browns seem to have shaken that dubious crown, this staff has what it takes to find the right quarterback and build a team around him. If it’s Justin Fields out of Ohio State or Zach Wilson from Brigham Young, the results could be very different. These two guys are in a virtual tie for the next pick, according to the pundits, but since the pundits don’t play or coach, let’s look a little deeper. Fields has all the tools—all of them—turned in top stats at Ohio State, and is arguably a dual threat, or at least a threat and a half. He completes passes and can move around in the pocket and run when he has to. He even beat Trevor Lawrence and Clemson 49–28 in the Sugar Bowl, throwing for 385 yards and running for 42 more. Ironically, Urban Meyer, who is a lock to pick Lawrence, retired as Ohio State’s head coach in 2018, but stayed on as assistant athletic director, saw Fields up close, and says “he has taken over the locker room” and possesses “incredible leadership and character.” That’s high praise from a guy who knows… and who will be competing against Fields.

So why not Zach Wilson? There’s nothing on paper not to like. Or on most of his film. It’s a question of what he can put together at the NFL level. He pitches beautiful throws, short, midrange, and even long. He can move around adequately. He’s steady. He could use some work on his progressions. For comps, I’d say the good parts of Johnny Manziel, clearly without the bad stuff. Or a 
better version of Drew Lock. There’s some concern with him coming from too comfortable a background to be hungry—his uncle is a wealthy airline mogul. It’s the Josh Rosen critique. But the fact is, Josh Rosen’s issues aren’t issues because he grew up too affluent. Those are easy knocks that are as unfair and uninformed as any prejudice. It’s all in the performance and character. Zach Wilson will make it or not based on this issue: Is he a game manager or a game-changer? In a saner world, Wilson is a high second-rounder. But this is the NFL and team need will make him a first-round pick. Wilson, who is rising fast, looks to eclipse Fields, go to the Jets, and the match may be better. Or he could go to QB-shopping 49ers, (who moved up) or the Falcons. Atlanta has a new coach—Arthur Smith, former offensive coordinator of the Titans, coming off the renaissance of Ryan Tannehill. With veteran Matt Ryan probably starting, that could be good training and maybe less immediate pressure for Wilson. But (a) the Falcons will stick with Ryan one more season, and (b) the 49ers are now ahead of them on the board. It looks like Wilson to the Jets and a hope that the QB curse is broken.

Next comes a wild card, Trey Lance, with only one real year of college experience. Because of COVID, he and his North Dakota State University Bisons played a full season in 2019 and only one game in 2020. But what a year he had in ’19. Wow. He did about all you could do in a season: A redshirted freshman, he was the starter in all sixteen games, threw for over 2,700 yards and ran for 1,100 and 14 TDs, completed almost 67 percent of his passes, and threw exactly zero interceptions. He took home a slew of honors: the Walter Payton and Jerry Rice awards, Outstanding Player, and the record for most passes without an interception. And his 
character may be his strongest trait. He grew up in a biracial family in a pretty white environment, was known to stand up to high school bullies, and doesn’t only define himself as a football player but has self-confidence in his ability and determination. He had hoped to go to the University of Minnesota but when they told him he’d have to play safety rather than quarterback, he said no. Despite some flattering tenders from Ivy League schools, he opted for North Dakota State. Not as high-profile as he wanted but, hey, it worked for Carson Wentz. And sticking to his QB goals worked for Lamar Jackson. So if those are indicators, he could be the diamond in the rough of 2021. Is he as big a threat with his legs as Lamar? Probably not. But if he could play behind someone for a year, with a good coach, Trey could become the prize of the 2021 class. Ideally, Trey goes to the 49ers, who traded up so they’re better than the usual first-round teams. He could learn from Jimmy Garoppolo… or go in early for the oft-injured starter. Or to the Falcons as Matt Ryan insurance. Or the Panthers—but with Teddy Bridgewater as the starter, Trey could get thrown in too fast. Look for the Panthers to trade, not draft (they did—Darnold.) Then there’s Mac Jones, who played winning football at Alabama. But winning at ‘Bama is table stakes. After Tua Tagovailoa left for the NFL draft, Jones took the Crimson Tide to a National Championship. But the Alabama question is always: Are you a great quarterback, or a good one surrounded by the best talent in college football? A great arm, no doubt, but as a decision-maker… well, his decision was almost always to throw—for over 4,000 yards, versus 14 yards running in 2020. He dominated Ohio State in the championship, throwing for 5 TDs. Does he have it all? Can he make it as an NFL starter? It’s 
a reach… unless he goes to a coach and team with patience, even stubbornness, not forcing him in early or trying to change him. But patience is not a hallmark of NFL teams.

So, using the Q Factor, our evaluation of future success is this: Trevor Lawrence, a clear yes. Justin Fields and Zach Wilson, toss-ups for the next pick(s), with our leaning toward Fields. Trey Lance is the wild card, but we’ll bet yes. And Mac Jones looks like a backup who should go mid-second round but will likely get snatched early (too early).

Here’s what actually happened in the draft: The Jaguars took Lawrence, to no one’s surprise. The Jets, post-Darnold, took draft-climbing Wilson over Justin Fields. The 49ers, now at number three, passed on Fields and took high risk/high reward Trey Lance. The Broncos, instead of taking a QB, tried to trade with the Packers for a disgruntled Aaron Rodgers which didn’t happen… yet. That let the Bears snag Fields. And the Patriots grabbed Mac Jones at number fifteen, a good fit for Josh McDaniels–style OC training. So, applying the Q Factor criteria, here’s our evaluation of future success: Trevor Lawrence is the best “can’t-miss” candidate since the Colts took Luck in ‵12. Urban Meyer waited for Lawrence before he came to the NFL. Zach Wilson’s limited playing time leaves question marks on being a franchise QB. Plus the Jets’ numerous QB busts. Can new management make the difference? Trey Lance may have the biggest upside. Again, limited data, but he goes to a team only two years after a Super Bowl. Justin Fields may also be a victim of team mismatch. The Bears and Matt Nagy don’t make for a promising scenario. And comparing Fields to Lamar Jackson is wishful thinking. Mac Jones is a good talent-to-team fit 
at the Patriots. Belichick’s style meshes well with Nick Saban’s at Alabama. The issue is which offense they run: Newton’s wide-open style or Jones’s pocket passer approach.

So, now, keep track of us and our prognostications and see how we did. The picks, the matches with teams and coaches, the outcomes year one. We think the Q Factor will prove valid again. We think it works and works better than the old methods. Not only that, we think it works in football, and beyond football… 

The Q Factor as CEO/Founder/Dean/Scientist/Military General Factor

In researching our premises—the isolated stats vs. the projectable trends, the wishful thinking vs. the hard evidence, the overvalued vs. the overlooked, the substance vs. the sizzle—the Q Factor evolved into more than a study of elite athletes. Much more. It became a study in leadership qualities, what they are, how to find them, and how not to miss them when they’re in front of us. We’ve found and refined a collection of indicators that may well help predict success in other fields—business, politics, academics, even science. In business, better signal callers can be the difference between profit and loss, market dominance or market struggle. In politics, identifying better candidates can mean better office holders, from town council to presidents. In science, they may point to visionaries, pioneers, and even vaccine discoverers.

We think the Q Factor can move leadership identification from guesswork to improved prediction. That’s a big promise… or hope.

Since the publication of the book, we’ve put our ideas in front of some of the most prestigious business and graduate school 
programs and organizations in the country—at MIT, Michigan, Ohio State, UCLA, Northwestern, Purdue, and Harvard, to name a few. We found intense interest and hunger for improving the leadership search process in business and other fields, as well as validation and corroboration of our premise. The demand for better predictors of future success, for fewer costly failures and washouts, less wasted time, investment, and misguided efforts—that demand is as great or greater in other fields than on the football field.

In the business world, top executive failure rates approach 75 percent. The 
Harvard Business Review
 reports two out of five new CEOs fail in the first eighteen months. 
FastCompany Magazine
 says over 75 percent of venture-backed startups crater. Why? Why else?—need. Negative quarters. Low dividends. Lost market share. Need, need, need. And that means CEO turnover. GE had sustained success with Jack Welsh and Jeffrey Immelt (think the 49ers with Montana and Young), but the next CEO lasted only a year. Recently we’ve seen “boss wanted” signs at Boeing, WeWork, McDonald’s, Nike, United Airlines, Wells Fargo, even red hot SoulCycle. The average CEO tenure is down to 7.6 years, about the same as a head coach.

Scrap the old rules:
 In business as on the football field, don’t expect new outcomes from old rules. Looking for the next CEOs in Ivy League schools over public universities (like relying on SEC and PAC 10 players over second-tier programs) has been disappointing. Public universities, in fact, have higher business-leadership success rates. Maybe it’s hungrier, scrappier kids, trying to prove something, like the overlooked high school QB who starts in Division II. As for MBAs, they do tend to rise to high-level executive positions in supporting roles to the boss… but not so 
often as 
the
 boss. Young Turks with street smarts rather than GPAs and grad degrees tend to start companies, upset norms, and create new markets.

Beware of highlights:
 Watch out for that one great moment in an exec’s career that might have been a fluke. Look for recurring success, from an early age, in the game films of life—from lemonade stand to summer house-painting to inventing an app to internship under a great boss to working endless hours… And remember, great leaders, like great athletes, often “declare early”—realizing another year of college ball or business school, even at Harvard or Wharton, may not make a better leader. That leader may be ready now.

Spot weaknesses:
 Like great QBs, great execs don’t just have highlights; their performances add up to trends. They consistently spot weakness in competition (Amazon vs. brick-and-mortar retail), or fill unmet needs (Uber, Instacart), or replace outdated models (bank and S&L mortgages vs. Rocket/Quicken). They see the “whole field”—360 degrees of the market, finding holes, staying mobile, not getting “sacked” or “blind-sided.”

Think two plays ahead:
 The best CEOs think two moves/quarters/products ahead (so do their boards, private equity investors, or venture capitalists.) Why is Amazon so consistently successful in upsetting norms? By looking ahead, not to what consumers want now, but what we’ll need tomorrow. How did Zoom anticipate our need to meet, socialize, and do business virtually? By looking toward tomorrow.

Go for it:
 Great QBs, great CEOs, and great entrepreneurs want to go for it on fourth down—not playing it safe, but playing it smart—seizing opportunity, innovating, being first to market, or creating a new market. Look at Apple, Tesla, Facebook, Instacart, Doordash, Beyond Meat, Snapchat, Lululemon, Audible, Spotify, 
Bleacher Report, Nest, Masterclass, Venmo, Sweetgreen, Square, Buzzfeed, plus the podcasters, the streaming platforms, the iterations of social media, and maybe even Bitcoin… to name a few. Now look at those that played it safe, and clung to the past in the face of change: Blackberry, Palm, Polaroid, Kodak, Blockbuster, AOL, Yahoo, MySpace, Atari, Xerox, IBM, JCPenney, Macys, Sears, RadioShack, Toys R Us, Hostess, Motorola and so many more. They didn’t go for it. They punted and tried to protect their lead, played a “prevent defense.” Always a bad bet. Companies that go for it have an advantage, four downs and a chance for another first down. Companies that don’t are often three and out.

Pressure can be a good thing:
 Lots of leaders do well when all goes according to plan, but all rarely goes according to plan. Great QBs and great CEOs perform at their best under pressure. Look for the leader who rises to the occasion when the play or business environment falls apart… which is often.

Call audibles:
 Study the companies and leaders that pivot in the face of massive change or disruption—digital technology, recession, global warming, housing bubbles, social media… even a pandemic, no doubt the ultimate challenge any of us have ever seen. Some restaurants seemed to turn on a dime to curbside pick-up and delivery, and some delivery services ramped up overnight to bring groceries, meds, and necessities safely to front doors. Suburban Realtors saw the family flight to escape cities. RV dealers offered safe vacation bubbles on wheels. Online game platforms and streaming video fed the hunger for stay-at-home entertainment. Mask makers, hand-sanitizer manufacturers, and drugmakers went into high gear for humanity. Even NFL teams pivoted on the fly to find ways to fend off COVID, some far better than others, like the Seahawks.

Find a way:
 Leaders find solutions in the face of daunting odds. They innovate products… 
or
 imitate/improve products for less… 
or
 upgrade products to optimize profit… 
or
 acquire competitors… 
or
 merge to gain market share… 
or
 even downsize. They find a way. In football, game-changing quarterbacks find ways to advance the ball—somehow. In business, whether it’s a public company CEO or a startup entrepreneur, great leaders find ways to make money—somehow.

If you’ll allow a highly inflated comparison, COVID-19 has been the all-time Super Bowl of global challenges. The parallel, grossly exaggerated as it may be, is the need for leadership—in this case, the desperate, do-or-die need to scrap old rules, go for it, perform under pressure, call audibles, and just find a way. Hail Mary heroes were wanted. And heroes emerged. They make the boldest of quarterbacks pale by comparison. Dr. Kizzmekia Corbett at NIH and Dr. Hamilton Bennett at Moderna were the QBs leading their teams to develop messenger RNA that became the basis for both the Moderna and Pfizer vaccines. Both were “coached” by Anthony Fauci, the quintessential, unflappable, play-calling head coach. Those two-dose vaccines showed 90–95 percent efficacy at preventing infection. Not far behind was the Johnson & Johnson single-dose vaccine. A massive rollout of the vaccines, coupled with safety protocols, immediately brought hope of stemming the tide of the virus. COVID-19 hasn’t been beaten. Yet. In fact, variants of the virus quickly emerged, and they will require more innovation, more determination, more leadership. But we’ve seen what is possible. We’ve seen what leadership can accomplish, even under the direst circumstances, or especially under those conditions. The best talents emerge. They aren’t surprises. They don’t just get lucky. 
They’ve been honing their talents for years and years. They’ve been in preparation for this test.

The Q Factor is a simple concept, a way of looking at data and observation. It will not change the world. It will not cure a pandemic. It will not be a magical predictor of genius. But what it might do is show us that there are always better ways to do what we do, from the daily diversion of sports, to the high-stakes world of business, to the medical research labs. Looking at trends, at extrapolations, rather than moments of glitzy or blind hope always work better. It doesn’t predict perfectly. It predicts better. And as any mathematician, scientist, CEO, or head coach will tell you, better is the first step to winning.

