# I

---



I

The Draft: Hype, Hope, and Hoopla

April 26, 2018, 8:00 p.m.—Arlington, Texas, AT&T Stadium

N
FL commissioner Roger Goodell, flanked by Dallas Cowboy legends Troy Aikman, Jason Witten, and Roger Staubach, strides into his realm—blinding klieg lights, pulsing highlight screens, earsplitting music, choreographed frenzy and fanfare. The fans jeer Goodell, the big-time wrestling bad guy a crowd loves to hate, while stomping and cheering for their hometown heroes and the Game of Football. The 2018 NFL Draft is about to begin. A hundred thousand stalwarts are packed into and around AT&T Stadium. Ultimately over 45 million people will watch this year’s draft, live on network and cable television, and streaming on sports apps.

The first draft was held in a hotel room in Philadelphia in 1936, with ninety names written on a chalkboard and owners taking turns making their selections, a bigger version of a backyard pickup game. This was before scouts, and agents, and the Combine, 
well before 1980 when brand-new cable channel ESPN approached Commissioner Pete Rozelle for rights to broadcast the event. He agreed, even though he thought no one would watch.

This was before the NFL discovered what Cirque du Soleil, Wall Street, and even NASA learned long ago—spectacle is good entertainment and good business. Put all the elements together and the show is even better. Sight, sound, and lighting wizardry now treat stock market IPOs, space shots, and the NFL Draft like Las Vegas extravaganzas. At the draft, borrowing from NASA, the players/astronauts are in one place, the draft brain trusts/Houston are in another, and the ceremony/liftoff is in still another. It’s all about the show. Of the 250 players in the draft, the twenty-two top players are at AT&T Stadium. But there’s live video of the other players, at home around the country, surrounded by anxious mothers, fathers, and grandparents, college teammates, agents, and hangers-on. And there are live feeds from each of the thirty-two teams’ nerve-center draft rooms back in Phoenix or New York or Detroit or Green Bay. At the draft itself, there are largely ceremonial reps from each team to accompany their picks onto the stage. But if you’re a fan, it all happens in one place, on 
your
 screen—TV, laptop, tablet, mobile phone, sports bar, or man cave—wherever you are. The team picks, the kid pumps his fist, his mother weeps, and he walks onstage draped in his new jersey… all brought to you by the NFL to fuel the hype for next season months before it starts.

Who gets picked? When? And why?

Who was the standout quarterback at the Combine? Who ran the fastest 40? How good is that running back from the Pac-12? How about that blitzing linebacker from the ACC? The blazing wide 
receiver from the Big Ten? Is that kid from the SEC going to play football or baseball? Who’s the top player in the draft, and who will be the overall number one pick? They may or may not be the same.

There’s always lots of talk—endless debate, analysis, emotion, arguments, predictions on future stars and future busts—every year, and this year is no different. Except this year, almost all of the talk is about one position: quarterback, quarterback, quarterback. This year, the experts say, there is a batch of potential first-round quarterbacks to rival the historic drafts of 1983—Dan Marino, John Elway, Jim Kelly, Ken O’Brien, and Tony Eason—or 2004—Ben Roethlisberger, Philip Rivers, and Eli Manning.

“NFL teams needing help at quarterback will have no excuses this year with a crop of talent worthy of comparison to even the renowned Class of 1983.”

NFLDraftScout.com

“Quarterbacks are going to dominate the conversation surrounding the 2018 NFL draft. It’s possible five signal-callers could get selected inside the top 10.”

Bleacher Report

“The numbers this year will show that this is a quarterback-rich draft class.”

Sports Illustrated

The prevailing wisdom is that, yes, as many as five could go in the first round of 2018. Up to nine could be picked in total. The combination of talent, need, and hyperbole is the making of a true feeding frenzy.

Quarterback is unlike any other position on a football team. The quarterback is the only player who is at the center of every offensive play. The quarterback may get a play called into his headset, but he decides whether to carry it out or call an audible, depending on what he sees at the line; he may execute his audible or go to a checkdown play; throw deep or dump the ball off short; he may hand off or he may fake the give and roll out, or keep the ball himself and run; or scramble to find a receiver late, or throw the ball away on purpose to save a sack or loss. He makes more decisions than anyone else on the football field with the possible exception of the head coach. And his decisions can mean the fate of a down, a series, the quarter, the score at halftime, an entire game, or a season. Yeah, a quarterback is important. In fact, the position is arguably more important than any other single position in any team sport. A quarterback can literally make or break a football team. You can win without a great one (I know; I did it), but it isn’t easy, and you can’t 
keep
 winning without one. Finding a great one, a franchise quarterback, may be the hardest challenge in football, or in all sports. So this year, with its promising, tantalizing collection of talent, is getting more attention than any draft in almost forty years.

Roger Goodell waits for the applause (and jeers) to die down, welcomes everyone to the 2018 draft, takes a dramatic pause—drumroll—and announces: 
“The Cleveland Browns are on the clock…”

Thanks to a losing record, the worst in football for yet another season, the Browns have the number one pick. In fact, they also have the number four pick. They’re on the clock, so they have ten minutes to submit their first selection. There’s been a lot of talk around the league, in Cleveland, in the media, online, anywhere football is spoken, about who they’ll take. One thing is for sure: They need a quarterback. The Browns have an almost remarkable (laughable 
if you live anywhere but Cleveland) record of drafting badly, especially quarterbacks. In 1999, with the number one overall pick, they took Tim Couch out of Kentucky. He played only five seasons, made the postseason once, was plagued by injuries, and was replaced by his backup. The Browns then went through a laundry list of NFL journeymen—Jeff Garcia, Luke McCown, Trent Dilfer, Charlie Frye, and Derek Anderson—before finally taking Brady Quinn from Notre Dame with the twenty-second pick in 2007. But Quinn could never quite nail down the starter’s job, battling with Anderson until he was traded to the Broncos for the 2010 season. From there, it was back to the backup department with a succession of stalwart placeholders from Colt McCoy to Jake Delhomme to Seneca Wallace. In 2012, the team used its first-round pick to take Brandon Weeden, who, after struggling in his early college career, had a record-setting senior year at Oklahoma State, enough to earn him the number twenty-two pick in the draft. But a combination of interceptions and injuries ended in only two seasons with the Browns.

In 2014, midway through the first round, the Browns took controversial Texas A&M quarterback Johnny Manziel. Nicknamed “Johnny Football” by his Aggie fans, he beat seemingly unbeatable Alabama and set Heisman passing records. He opted to enter the NFL Draft after his junior year and was deemed to be either the next great superstar or, in the words of Barry Switzer, “an arrogant little prick,” too full of himself to be coached. Unfortunately, the Browns’ twenty-second pick (maybe it was the number 22, like Quinn and Weeden) made more headlines off the field than on (fines for hand gestures, party videos, visits to Las Vegas, and domestic violence charges) and was cut loose before the 2016 season. He hasn’t been able to sign on with another NFL team since.

After three more seasons of back-to-the-backups—Brian Hoyer, Josh McCown, Cody Kessler, Robert Griffin III, and then trading for DeShone Kizer—it was finally time for Cleveland to get another shot at the number one overall pick in 2018. Would they break their quarterback jinx… or were they really cursed? The cynics were betting on the curse. Nine minutes and counting…

The Browns are facing a classic draft dilemma (in some ways a good problem to have). They have both the first and fourth picks in the first round. Do they take a quarterback with the number one pick or play it more strategically? Picking a franchise quarterback is hardly a science, and Cleveland has the record to prove it. The draft tends to sift out the best players and push them to the top—it does not predict greatness, only pretty goodness. The Browns’ coach, Hue Jackson, has a 1-31 record and is under a lot of pressure. Maybe the wise move would be to pass on a quarterback with the first pick, take the consensus draft superstar, Saquon Barkley, running back out of Penn State, and set out to notch some wins under veteran QB Tyrod Taylor, signed in the off-season. Then, with their number four pick, they could draft the best available quarterback. The Giants were picking number two, and with their commitment to Eli Manning, they were unlikely to take a quarterback. The Jets at number three were going to take a quarterback, but that would leave four of the top five prospects on the board for Cleveland’s number four pick. Plenty of draft rooms had Baker Mayfield (Oklahoma) at the top, but plenty had Sam Darnold (USC) number one, followed by Josh Allen (Wyoming) and Josh Rosen (UCLA). Since there is no obvious winner, Cleveland might well get their favorite anyway. Sound strategy… but not what the Browns are known for.

The Cleveland Browns take Baker Mayfield…
 Cleveland’s pick was something of a surprise. Not only did they take a quarterback 
with their number one pick, they took Baker Mayfield, a guy with a lot of promise and a lot of questions. The Browns’ draft room was split, with Hue Jackson and offensive coordinator Todd Haley not in the Mayfield camp, but GM John Dorsey and owner Jimmy Haslam wanting Mayfield. Is that just scuttlebutt? Hardly. Multiple sources reported the room was divided and Todd Haley texted a close associate that Baker Mayfield “was not my guy.”

Here’s a pre-draft snapshot of Mayfield, Oklahoma:

NFL COMBINE
: Physical: 6 ft. 1 in., 215 lbs. • 40 yd. dash: 4.84 secs. • Vertical jump: 29.0 in. • Broad jump: 111 in. • 3 cone drill: 7.0 secs. • 20 yd. shuttle: 4.28 secs. • NFL evaluation: 6.09, NFL instant starter

Baker Mayfield has guts… or confidence… or a chip on his shoulder. Despite an impressive high school career, he didn’t have big-name colleges beating down the doors at Lake Travis High in Austin to sign him. So instead of playing for a second-tier school, he walked on at Texas Tech and won the starter’s job and a full ride. Then, in spite of a 5-0 record before an injury, the coach opened up the competition. So Mayfield became a walk-on again, this time at Oklahoma, and once eligible, won the starter’s job and a full ride once again. He led the Sooners to the Rose Bowl. And he won the Heisman Trophy. He’s a little arrogant. But maybe he’s earned it.

Mayfield has a very different evaluation than Sam Darnold or Josh Rosen; he’s more of today’s spread quarterback. The good and bad is that he creates beyond the strict scope of the play but doesn’t go through the 1-2-3 progression-read from under center within a 
protected pocket. This is not to say he can’t do the progression from under center, but it wasn’t the game style within the Oklahoma offense.

Mayfield completed 70 percent of his passes in his last season in college, with 43 touchdowns to just 6 picks. He led the country in passing efficiency, breaking his own record from the season before. So while you aren’t going to look at his 70 percent completion percentage and question his accuracy, that doesn’t mean the questions aren’t there. Mayfield, more so than Rosen, Darnold, or Allen, was often throwing to wide-open players rather than “throwing them open”—that is, throwing into a tighter window. Mayfield could afford to miss a window and still complete the pass because the offensive scheme was to throw to wide-open reads, so a slight miss was still a good stat on his sheet.

His completion percentage also benefited from horizontal throws and quick screens (the typical kind of spread college passing you can compare to Cam Newton when he was a prospect). The throws are good and effective, but as one executive scouting him said, he could only find about 20 percent of his throws from Mayfield’s full season that would extrapolate into NFL play.

Mayfield is light on his feet and quick to elude rushers and use his running game. He uses his eyes well and knows exactly where his guys will be on the field. He shows total command of the offense—an offense built for him—throws well on the run, and is a playmaker when the initial plan breaks down. He can do what is asked of him but can also play outside the framework of the play. He was a 67 percent passer when on the move. His smart reads save his arm talent a lot of times. Admittedly, because of his playmaking ability, he will take some unnecessary risks and incur some unnecessary sacks when trying to make a play or wait for a receiver to break open down the field.

The knock or potential knock on Mayfield has been attitude: taunts, brashness, defiance—they’ve given it all kinds of labels. He did a “crotch grab” as silent trash talk to Kansas. He made a neck-slash gesture to an opposing team after a TD. He carried a sign into the Rose Bowl that read “Pretenders” because a sportswriter had said the Sooners didn’t belong there against Georgia. But he also admitted a member of the Georgia team had the right to mock him because they won the game. He’s emotional, yes. He’s brash, yes. He has a chip on his shoulder. But I see it differently. His emotion is generally aimed at the other team, not his own teammates. He’s tenacious. He’s a competitor. His teams seem to rally around him. That’s worth a lot. I wasn’t alone in my initial take. One of my insiders—one who didn’t have a high pick or a seeming QB vacancy—said Mayfield was “the guy we liked the most… He made very few mistakes… Now, he had balls deflected, but in terms of making timing and accuracy, yeah, he had it all.” He tempered his assessment, “You were a little bit worried about coachability, personality, and the… immaturity, things like that,” but his team still had Baker at the top.

Comps
: The typical comparisons for Mayfield range from Doug Flutie to Russell Wilson (small for a quarterback) to Johnny Manziel (questionable attitude) to Dak Prescott (though a later draft pick). Like Flutie and Wilson, he may be small for a quarterback (6 ft. 1 in.), with a worry about lower release meaning batted balls, but he compensates with his other skills. Like Manziel, there are concerns about attitude, but I see his brashness as leadership on the field, not the egotism of Manziel. And I see him most like Marcus Mariota in his playmaking ability and the type of offense they ran in college. Like Mariota, Mayfield was an absolute stud in the red zone and rarely turned the ball over. He will have to develop the traditional 
NFL QB skills to consistently win from the pocket, but he is smart and has a major work ethic that also feels a lot like Mariota.

Bottom line
: If he can adapt to NFL-style football, if he can make the transition to playing under center, if he can “walk on” again, Baker Mayfield could turn a franchise around from day one. Big ifs, big upside.

So… the biggest questions on Mayfield are whether his accuracy, his 68.6 completion percentage, his ratio of 129 TDs to 29 INTs, and his ability to run—404 carries for 1,083 yards—will translate to the NFL. In my opinion, his high completion percentage is a little misleading. Mayfield, unlike some of the other top-rated quarterbacks, was surrounded by perhaps the best offensive talent in college football. When you look at the film or tape (the football catchalls for any kind of video—what used to be film, and then videotape, and is now digital files), yes, he completed the passes, but often they were not the spot-on throws that he’ll need against NFL defenders. As my first NFL mentor, legendary coach Bill Walsh taught me, judge accuracy less by down-the-field throws and more by where the QB places the ball for short and intermediate targets, the throws that allow a receiver to gain yards after the catch without having to break stride to catch the ball. Many of Mayfield’s easy flare routes and slant routes were placed all over the field, sending a warning to me that he may struggle to attain this same level of accuracy in the NFL. Another plus that may translate as a minus is that Mayfield was very productive in college with runs in critical situations, leading people to call him a good running QB. Here’s the but: His size and physical makeup will not allow him to have the same productivity running in the NFL… and will likely get him killed (we’ve seen that movie before). Maturity issues have also plagued Mayfield, but his 
post-draft news conferences suggest he is learning to present himself in a more professional, poised manner.

Will he play? The Browns acquired former Bills starter Tyrod Taylor. This could be an interesting competition… if it is a competition. When a club commits the first overall pick in a draft, I’d say the competition is over. The question isn’t if, it’s when the top pick takes the field. Taylor is a seven-year vet who spent his first four seasons backing up Joe Flacco in Baltimore. He went to Buffalo as a free agent and was a respectable 62 percent passer with 51 TDs to 18 INTs, diligently following the game plan they gave him: sub 450 throws per season, nurture a running game, don’t turn the ball over. Even though he did what he was asked, or maybe because of it, Buffalo decided he wasn’t good enough to win, so off to Cleveland he went. I can’t imagine what fiction Hue Jackson spun to sign Taylor, knowing the team was mandated to get a top QB in this year’s draft. Unlike Josh McCown in New York, who was signed specifically to mentor whomever the Jets would choose, Taylor likely had to be sold on the promise he would be the starter, be able to keep the job as long as he was winning, and even with a first overall pick in the wings, be assured he’d at least get the chance to show his skills for the next team to sign him. Jackson has even reiterated that Taylor will be the starter. It is interesting that Taylor, like Mayfield, is an alpha male who has had to fight for everything he has ever gotten. Although he was polite after the Browns’ pick, I can’t imagine Taylor is genuinely interested in mentoring Mayfield.

How will all of this play out? Hue Jackson, a head coach with an abysmal win-loss record, is now saddled with a QB not of his own choosing, nor of his offensive coordinator’s. Plenty of sites and experts did have Mayfield ranked number one with stats to back them up. 
But others disagreed. And relying on pure analytical data is dangerous. Ask even the most ardent analytics devotees and they’ll tell you that the best athlete assessments are comprised of a 
combination
 of elements: numbers, experience, and observation, the last being the tiebreaker. If you don’t see it with your own eyes, it’s not there. They’ll also tell you that baseball players can be sized up analytically on individual performance—pitcher, batter, fielder—much more accurately than football players who interact with ten others on every play. The way to pick a quarterback is by consensus of knowledge, not by a set of numbers or a power struggle in the draft room. But despite that wisdom, according to my sources, it seems that consensus was lacking when the Browns’ pick was made. And that means trouble. How are the GM and coach supposed to work together when they’re not in sync? Why is the owner again “helping” make draft picks? How will all that work in the meeting room and on the field? Yes, Jackson ultimately endorsed the Mayfield pick, but it seems he was just parroting the party line, to appear to be in line with his bosses. Of course, if things go south, Haley can invoke an “I told you so” in looking for his next job.

So with Mayfield, when and how does the quarterback transition take place? If Taylor starts to turn the Browns around, when/how do you pull him for Mayfield? If he isn’t winning but they don’t play Mayfield, how long can Hue Jackson last? Just ask John Fox. When the Bears took Mitchell Trubisky with the second overall pick in 2017, Fox’s plan was to start Mike Glennon, bringing along Trubisky, letting him adjust to the NFL, learn from Glennon, and between the two, chalk up enough wins to enable Fox to keep his job for another year. Then, once Trubisky had his legs, and the team was improved, Fox and the Bears could play at their best the following season. The best-laid plans… When Glennon started out 1-3, 
Fox had to turn to Trubisky early, who wasn’t ready, and proved it with a 4-8 record—59 percent completion, 7 TDs and 7 INTs. Fox was fired. So much for “bringing along” the quarterback.

In Cleveland, one thing that does match up in Taylor and Mayfield is that they’re both ball protectors. Taylor, like Alex Smith in Kansas City, may carry it to extremes, avoiding turning the ball over but, as a result, not taking chances down the field, even when bolder decisions are what’s needed. On the other hand, Mayfield is gutsier, more of a gunslinger—which can be effective in college but usually not so much in the NFL, which requires that elusive, perfect balance of bold and wise. The good news is that with their similarities, the offense won’t have to change a lot in the transition from Taylor to Mayfield. And it will happen. Probably sooner rather than later. Just ask the owner.

“The New York Giants are on the clock…”
 With the draft favorite—“once in a generation” running back Saquon Barkley—still on the board, the Giants grab him with the number two pick. As predicted by insiders, but defying fan and jock sports-radio demands, they doubled down on betting their near future on Eli Manning at quarterback. The Giants’ brain trust—GM Dave Gettleman, assistant GM Kevin Abrams, head coach Pat Shurmur—collectively said they “do not see a franchise QB in the draft worthy of passing up Barkley for.” To back that up, they let it be known they wouldn’t have taken a quarterback even if the Browns had scooped up Barkley. But in the fourth round, they did opt for quarterback Kyle Lauletta out of Richmond.

“The Jets are on the clock…”
 Back to the quarterback feeding frenzy, it’s the Jets’ turn. They’re almost as desperate for a franchise QB as the Browns. Back in 1965, the Jets used their number 
one overall pick in the then-independent AFL to take Alabama’s Joe Namath (outbidding the NFL’s St. Louis Cardinals), and brash, flashy, fun, pantyhose-modeling Namath led the team to a Super Bowl upset, complete with a pregame win guarantee, over the Baltimore Colts… followed by a multi-decade franchise quarterback drought. In 1983, the Jets took Ken O’Brien out of UC Davis with the twenty-fourth pick (surprisingly over Dan Marino), and while he attained over 25,000 yards passing in his pro career and achieved a rare perfect passer rating (158.3), he was only able to get to the postseason once and managed a single winning season.

The team then ran through a variety of stand-ins and/or big names in their waning days—Browning Nagle, Boomer Esiason, Vinny Testaverde, Chad Pennington, and an aging Brett Favre. It wasn’t until they used the number five pick in 2009 to take Mark Sanchez out of USC that there was a spark of QB hope. Coach Rex Ryan bet on the rookie and he led the team to the postseason in 2009, albeit thanks to the Bengals resting their starters in the final regular-season game, and the Jets made it all the way to the AFC Championship for only the third time in the team’s history (though they lost). The following year, thanks in part to another gift—a late-season loss by the Jaguars—the Jets were in the postseason again, and again made it to the AFC Championship (and again lost). Unfortunately, the bubble burst shortly after, Sanchez was released, and his career devolved to a tour of backup duty for the Eagles, Broncos, Cowboys, Bears, and Redskins. Soon after Sanchez’s departure, Rex Ryan, who had guaranteed a Jets Super Bowl not once but three times, was shown the door. (He landed in Buffalo, where he made the Super Bowl guarantee again. And again it didn’t happen. I might suggest a different PR tactic.) For the Jets, after Sanchez came another 
succession of QB placeholders—Geno Smith, Ryan Fitzpatrick, and veteran/mentor (not always one and the same) Josh McCown.

The Jets needed a quarterback, a real honest-to-god franchise quarterback, to bring the team and the fans a shred of hope that the glory days of Broadway Joe might return. And—due to some complex pick-swapping, basically giving up a lot of later-round opportunities—they had the number three pick to get one. I won’t say the Jets tanked in 2017 in order to get in position for a high pick in 2018, but management gave Todd Bowles (in year four of his contract, going 5-11 the last two seasons) an extension to underline that they understood what taking a rookie QB usually means—hope and promise, not immediate results. Or to give Bowles one last chance. Not sure if the Giants would or would not take a quarterback, the Jets had to believe at least three other QBs were worthy of being taken that high (my strategy for the Browns, which wasn’t followed).

The Jets, like a lot of teams, had Sam Darnold at the top of their draft board. Whether a team has an early pick or not, or a position need, they evaluate all the top players. One of my sources at the Ravens, who were lukewarm on Darnold, said, “We liked him, thought he would be good for somebody, but it wasn’t like we’re were thinking, ‘Oh man, this guy…’” But at the Eagles, who were banking on a healthy Carson Wentz, their VP of player personnel, Joe Douglas, told me, “Sam Darnold was the number one QB on our board in Philly. We did not interview him but did a more clinical evaluation.” A “clinical evaluation” from Joe Douglas means a lot. Joe worked his way up the personnel ranks, scouting for me at the Ravens, then at the Bears as director of college scouting, then the Eagles. He did his homework on Darnold and liked him. And Joe was hardly alone. (Joe’s early opinion of Sam would turn out to have consequences later on.)

“With the number three pick…”
 The word is, the Jets liked Darnold best, but thought highly of all the top QB prospects 
except
 one: Baker Mayfield. So when the Browns took Mayfield, the Jets breathed a sigh of relief. Supposedly, VP of player personnel Brian Heimerdinger leaned over to GM Mike Maccagnan and said, “You have a horseshoe up your ass.” And then, when the Giants opted for Barkley and not a quarterback, the Jets were thrilled to have their top choice, Sam Darnold. When they’d made the trades earlier in the year, it’s unlikely they thought Sam Darnold would still be available, but Cleveland gave them a gift. Well inside the draft clock’s ten minutes, Maccagnan was ready to put Darnold’s name on the board but, due to the script for televised drama, the team had to wait… and wait. Having followed Darnold for almost four years—the combined work of Heimerdinger, head coach Bowles, offensive coordinator Jeremy Bates, and the whole scouting team, what was another few minutes? A lifetime, it seemed. Finally they put Darnold’s name in and they hoped the future was now.

Pre-draft snapshot—Sam Darnold, USC:

NFL COMBINE
: Physical: 6 ft. 3 in., 221 lbs. • 40 yd. dash: 4.85 secs. • 26.5 Vertical jump: 26.5 in. • Broad jump: 105 in. • 3 cone drill: 6.96 secs. • 20 yd. shuttle: 4.4 secs. • NFL evaluation: 7.00, Pro Bowl caliber

As a coach evaluating players, you try not to have biases based on your own past experience, good or bad, particularly when it comes to the school the player comes from. But sometimes you have biases 
anyway. Mine was UCLA. I just never had much luck with prospects from there, with one big exception—offensive tackle Jonathan Ogden, one of the greatest players I’ve ever coached. When it comes to quarterbacks, USC has kind of earned its own stigma. It’s been discredited, fairly or not, because of draft picks who didn’t live up to their promise: Matt Cassel, Matt Leinart, and Matt Barkley (hey, maybe it’s just guys named Matt). To some extent, Mark Sanchez and Carson Palmer would be the exceptions. Still, Sam Darnold is fighting the unfair USC stigma already.

Physically, Darnold is impressive. He has good size and frame and is a thick, solid six foot three, but he doesn’t sacrifice any athleticism with his size. He ran a 4.85 dash in the Combine, and the game tapes show he’s a more than competent runner with the ball in his hands when needed.

But primarily, Darnold is a pocket-first passer in the tradition of USC offenses. He can read the field and keep his eyes on the secondary while sensing the rush. He trusts his reads and gets the ball out quickly. He does have an elongated release that is hard to ignore, but once he makes a decision, he can execute any throw on the field. He trusts his arm (critical) and has a good feel for the open spaces on the field.

What I like on tape is that Sam doesn’t make it harder than it is. If his primary read is open, he’ll take it. He doesn’t overcomplicate his reads. He’s already mentally moving on to the next play. He has a strong tendency to throw a catchable ball, and he’s accurate. That’s more than just his completion percentage; he hits his pass catchers in stride, and that allows them to run after the catch. That’s something we focus on for the receivers but it’s an underappreciated trait for a quarterback.

More about his elongated throwing motion: It’s very circular and drops all the way down to his hip, almost like Tim Tebow in his long baseball throwing motion. The problem is it can allow the defense to jump his passes. And that’s what the stat sheets show: 20 picks in his last 20 games; 22 turnovers in 2017—13 picks and 9 fumbles. And he had 24 turnovers the year before. You have to worry that it’s not a fluke; it’s a style of throwing that can lead to a pattern. That’s a red flag.

Some of his misses come from trying to use all upper body on his throws and not bringing in his lower body. His touch and accuracy were probably best in 2016, not as good in 2017. And he took sacks when he could have/should have gotten the ball out and, at worst, thrown an incompletion. An incompletion is way better than a sack and lost yardage. While he can run, he doesn’t always protect his body as well as you’d like in the open field, and that’s dangerous.

Comps
: Sam reminds me of Carson Palmer on a number of levels. Not only did both quarterbacks play at USC, Palmer was the overall first pick in the 2003 NFL Draft, and whether Darnold went to the Jets or not, he was going early. Palmer played eight seasons for the Bengals, led the team to their first playoff appearance in fifteen years, and was a two-time Pro Bowler. After that, his performance declined; he blew out his knee, had a conflict with ownership, was traded to the Oakland Raiders and then to Arizona. With the Cardinals, Palmer continued his run of dependable performances when in the game, but was injury plagued and out a lot. His most successful post-Bengals year was 2015, helping the Cardinals advance to the NFC Championship game and being named to his third Pro Bowl. After spending much of the 2017 season on the injured reserve list, Palmer retired. All in all, Palmer was a solid player in the NFL for a number of years but lacked a certain leadership quality, with a 
demeanor not unlike Darnold’s. In fairness, it was certainly not all on Palmer that he had only four playoff games to his credit: One of the hardest things to do is to mentally separate a quarterback from what goes on around him—the weapons he’s given (or not given), injuries, team management and ownership. Nonetheless, we all look for the elusive quality of leadership.

Sam has a similar body and mechanics to Andrew Luck when Luck was a prospect. But Darnold’s motion is hardly as refined. Luck had a lot of preseason hype but lived up to it. Sam played well but has the turnover problem. All in all, he may be the least risky QB in this class (not meant as a backhanded compliment), but I don’t think he is going to transform a team from day one like a healthy Andrew Luck did the Colts.

Bottom line
: Sam Darnold is a solid player with the size, tools, and mental ability to play the position for a long time. Leadership is an unknown… and almost always is at this point. His throwing motion is a tough pill to swallow—and turnovers are a worry—but he definitely has more positives than negatives. Which team he ended up with could make all the difference. If the Browns had grabbed him with the overall first pick, the question would have been: Would he play a while behind Tyrod Taylor, or would the win-now pressure be too much to keep the new savior out of the game? If the Giants had taken Darnold, it’s likely he would’ve spent time learning from Eli Manning, working on his mechanics and maybe getting some leadership lessons. But neither of those scenarios played out; Darnold is with the Jets. His success will ride not only on himself but on the Jets’ supporting cast too—his teammates and coaches. Unlike the Browns, the Jets didn’t make many moves to add to the offensive side of the ball in free agency, so all of 
their chips are on Darnold to be the difference-maker in an offense that ranked 28th (out of 32) in total offense and 24th in both scoring and passing. Isaiah Crowell at running back and Terrelle Pryor at wide receiver aren’t big enough weapons on their own. So when Darnold finally does go in, like Jimmy Garoppolo in San Francisco, he is going to have the onus to turn it around with his play.

The key phrase there is “when Darnold finally does go in.” The Jets starter is longtime veteran Josh McCown. McCown played college ball at SMU and Sam Houston State, was drafted by the Cardinals in the third round in 2002, and also played for the Lions, Raiders, Dolphins, Panthers, Hartford Colonials, 49ers, Bears, Buccaneers, and Browns (it may have been easier to list where he didn’t play). He comes from a quarterback family, as he’s the older brother of former NFL QB Luke McCown and younger brother of former Texas A&M QB Randy McCown. The Jets specifically signed the thirty-eight-year-old to mentor whomever they selected, which may well work, since Josh wants to go into coaching when he’s done playing. This is about as ideal a situation as a rookie can have. Darnold knows he will not be put in, barring injury, until he’s ready to function successfully. Of course, there is a wild card: Teddy Bridgewater is also here and he isn’t going to roll over and abandon his comeback just to make way for Darnold. But Bridgewater has a history of being realistic and mature. He had an excellent working relationship with Case Keenum in Minnesota. He’s a competitor but he’s not a disrupter.

As to when Darnold will actually go in, coach Todd Bowles put it this way: “We’re not going to throw him in there, but at the same time, we’re not going to hold him back either.” Now there’s a statement to cover all possibilities, including GM pressure, owner pressure, fan pressure, and wanting to hold on to your job.

Sam Darnold has all the tools to be a successful NFL quarterback, but yes, he has turned the ball over a good deal. Does he have the “command presence” you like to associate with your face-of-the-franchise pick? I’m not sure. (If there were analytics for leadership, picking a franchise quarterback would be a piece of cake.) But it does look like Darnold can handle the spotlight. Off the field, he can deal with the attention and hype of being a starting QB in New York. Darnold was the favorite of the USC Trojans, and they may as well be an NFL franchise in terms of celebrity, glitz, and pressure. It’s not the Big Apple but it is the LA Coliseum.

For me, after the supporting cast, after the spotlight, after the rookie adjustments, here’s the key for Darnold: Jeremy Bates, Jets offensive coordinator. Jeremy told another coach, who in turn told me, that Sam Darnold is the 
kind
 of player he wants—that is, not just a good quarterback, but the type, style, and demeanor of player he believes can win in his system. Bates is a Mike Shanahan/Jon Gruden kind of coach who sets up a system—a structured scheme—for the offense, and then finds the quarterback that fits it, not the other way around. He does not put a priority on a QB that makes plays “outside the design of the offense” (à la Baker Mayfield or Lamar Jackson) but rather on one who makes plays within it. Darnold is the definition of the player who plays within the system. The Jets and Bates don’t see what other people call a lack of “command presence.” They see a system player—therefore an asset, not a liability. If Bates is right, he’s got a winner. 
If
 Bates is the OC for a while…

With the fourth pick…
 The Browns were next on the clock and now obviously didn’t need a quarterback. There were several good 
choices on the board, but they passed on some tempting ones: Bradley Chubb, a pass-rushing end from NC State, and Quenton Nelson, an offensive lineman from Notre Dame, both considered the highest-rated non-QBs after Saquon Barkley. Instead, the Browns took Denzel Ward, a highly touted corner from Ohio State. To bear out the prevailing wisdom, Chubb and Nelson went at number five and six respectively, to Denver and Indianapolis. Again, the Browns surprised everyone. In a good way? Or in the old way? Time will tell very soon. (Spoiler alert: All three picks—Chubb, Nelson, and Ward—had outstanding NFL rookie years, with Nelson and Ward named to the Pro Bowl.)

“The Buffalo Bills are on the clock…”
 Ten minutes to change their fate. Like the Jets, the Bills are a long way from their glory days. Jack Kemp out of Occidental College, seventeenth-round pick of the Lions in 1957, came to the then-AFL Bills to lead them to five Championship games and two wins, before he went on to serve in Congress, as secretary of housing and urban development, and later flirted with a run for president. After Kemp, it was twenty-one years until Buffalo had another star quarterback: Jim Kelly, one of five first-round QBs in the famed class of 1983. Kelly was picked by Buffalo but initially went to the USFL Houston Gamblers before coming to the Bills. He led the Bills to a then-record four consecutive Super Bowls—unfortunately no wins—and Kelly was a first-ballot Hall of Famer. That was the end of the good times in the Nickel City and the beginning of a parade of not-quites: Todd Collins—round two from Michigan; Doug Flutie; and Drew Bledsoe, all on the downside of their careers; J. P. Losman—round one from Tulane; Trent Edwards from Stanford, Ryan Fitzpatrick 
for four valiant years, E. J. Manuel out of Florida State—their last first-rounder; then Kyle Orton, Matt Cassel, and Tyrod Taylor. And as the QBs came and went, head coaches did likewise.

Interesting stat: Throughout Jim Kelly’s career he had one head coach, Marv Levy. Levy was head coach of the Bills for eleven years. After Kelly, there were twelve starting quarterbacks and ten head coaches and exactly two postseason appearances, both losses. Coincidence? No. It’s hard to find and develop a franchise quarterback. And it’s almost impossible for a head coach to do that in a single season… but not uncommon for owners and fans to expect the coach to do it. Sean McDermott is in his first year as head coach as the team makes its 2018 QB draft pick. Buckle your seat belt. The Bills traded with Tampa to move up to number seven, which, at this point in the draft, gave them a chance to get one of the “Joshes”—Allen out of Wyoming or Rosen from UCLA. They were leaning toward Josh Allen and were surely looking over their shoulders thinking Arizona might have their eyes on him too. McDermott had been the defensive coordinator for the Panthers when they took Cam Newton, and Allen had been compared to Newton more than once—similar size, similar arm strength, both solid runners.

In a last-minute wrinkle, on the morning of the draft a story surfaced about racist tweets, complete with the N-word, posted by Allen when he was in high school. Some questioned whether this would affect how teams looked at Allen. My sense is the Bills were confident in their reading of a more mature Allen who, to this point, had received nothing but ringing endorsements about his character. Cynics might conjecture that somebody found and planted the story at draft time in hopes of getting teams to come 
off of Allen. Or even that the Bills had done it to keep others from taking Allen earlier. Can you imagine anyone doing something manipulative like that in big-time sports or business?… he asked cynically. Who knows? But it makes for good conspiracy theories. To Allen’s credit, the moment the tweets surfaced, he was forthright, saying that when it occurred he was “young and dumb,” a statement of the obvious but one that had to be made.

Growing up in rural Firebaugh, California, Allen declined the opportunity to play high school ball in the more cosmopolitan Fresno, opting to remain in his hometown farming community, mostly white and Hispanic, with limited exposure to African Americans. That’s hardly an excuse for those tweets, but it does seem that going off to play big-time college football at the very least changed his perspective. One of the guys who was most vocal in favor of Buffalo drafting him was his former Wyoming teammate Eddie Yarbrough, now a linebacker for the Bills, who is Black.

Here’s a pre-draft snapshot of Allen, Wyoming:

NFL COMBINE
: Physical: 6 ft. 5 in, 233 lbs. • 40 yd. dash: 4.75 secs. • Vertical jump: 33.5 in. • Broad jump: 119 in. • 3 cone drill: 6.93 secs. • 20 yd. shuttle: 4.4 secs. • NFL evaluation: 5.9, become NFL starter

Déjà vu Kyle Boller. Evaluating/rationalizing Josh Allen is like reliving the Ravens selling ourselves on Boller in 2003. We had accuracy and completion concerns but tried to justify his weaker stats with excuses: lack of talent around him, second-rate receivers, not enough time in the pocket due to his offensive line, etc. We fell in love with his 
strengths and had blind spots for his glaring weakness: consistently far below 60 percent completion stats. In fact, his college best was only 53.3 percent. (By way of comparison, Peyton Manning had four college seasons at 60 percent plus, Dak Prescott had three out of four seasons above 60 percent, Tony Romo had two, Mark Sanchez two.)

And I’m not alone in my concerns. One of the guys who was very much part of picking Kyle Boller, and who is now in the position of evaluating and rating players on the draft board, said this about Josh Allen: “We liked a lot about him. He [did] have all this stuff off the field. But what goes into completions, yeah, that’s what scared us… I hate to say this, but it was just like Kyle… was the same thing… I just see this guy at times, he’s just not a naturally gifted, accurate passer.”

Granted, Josh Allen has the elite frame at six foot five you look for. He’s strong and has the ability to shake off some arm tackles in the pocket and extend the play, à la Big Ben Roethlisberger. But “à la Big Ben” comparisons are usually wishful thinking. Lots of guys are big, but not Ben. Shaking off a tackle doesn’t make you a Super Bowl quarterback. Better stats and better decisions do. And the problem is, Allen’s accuracy breaks down when he’s forced off of his spot. He does show the ability to make some throws no one else in this draft class can match—long and deep without much effort. There will be some QB coaches who think they can build on that potential and fix the accuracy issues (another common delusion we coaches fall for).

On the plus side, Josh Allen has taken a fair amount of snaps from under center, so you can extrapolate a good number of throws and project him as an NFL-style passer. That’s clearer than trying to evaluate a lot of college spread QBs that are single read and then they take off and run. Allen scans the entire field and goes 
through a progression, again NFL-style. There’s some good tape of him as a play-action passer as well, turning his back to the defense and making a quick read and decision. He hits intermediate-level throws pretty well, particularly with a clean pocket (though there’s no guarantee of that in the NFL). Allen can run when he has to, but he’s a pass-first quarterback who makes plays with his legs, not the opposite, a run quarterback who can make some throws; and given the choice, you want the former.

But—and it’s a big but—from my perspective, Allen is a rerun of the Boller show, even down to the circus they’re having over his arm strength. He can heave the ball ninety yards. Wow. But how many times do you need that in a game—or a career? Once maybe. And it’s usually when you’re in pretty deep trouble, late in a game, hoping for a miracle. Much more telling is his completion percentage. After no initial NCAA Division I interest and a year at Reedley College, in both of Allen’s two full seasons as a starter at Wyoming his rate was 56 percent. Regardless of the second-tier talent around him, that’s hard to overlook. And keep in mind, in the Mountain West Conference he was always throwing 
against
 subpar defensive talent. In his two games versus Power Five teams, he was a virtual no-show: 23 of 40 for just 174 yards and 2 picks against Iowa, and then 9 of 24 for only 64 yards and a pick against Oregon. So he had a weak completion percentage against weak defenses and was far worse against better teams. Boller-esque.

Allen, typical of big-arm quarterbacks, tries to make up too much with arm stretch, convincing himself he can beat a safety or an outside-breaking cornerback with his pass velocity. It leads to too many poor decisions and breakups—or worse, interceptions. His throws are similar to Cam Newton’s, with his deep ball 
coming out flat. When he tries to compensate with a touch throw, it’s often short-armed and soft, floating away. Josh needs to find a way to harness both weapons, where he can unleash a cannon but, when needed, also throw with touch. And he needs to improve his timing with better footwork. Right now, when he moves around the pocket, he doesn’t keep his feet under him and stay in delivery mode. He has to reset in order to throw, and that makes him late. Similarly, his anticipation throws leave a lot to be desired.

Not to get too negative here, but there’s one other factor we have to put in the mix: signature games. That’s when you see potential star quality, leadership moments, indelible performances. You want to look at the tapes and see games where the quarterback was clearly the best player on the field. I looked hard and I can’t find those games. Even when he was playing small-ball college. He had just one game over 300 yards. One. That’s hard to imagine. Where was his moment? That has to make you second-guess him as a top ten pick or even a first-rounder.

So… Josh Allen is your classic boom-or-bust player. For sure, some GMs, coaches, and scouts are going to talk themselves into believing that this kid can be great. That’s a fantasy I’ve lived. In the end, Allen is a cross between Kyle Boller and Jake Locker—Boller for the arm strength but poor completion numbers, and Locker for athleticism but also abysmal completions. Boller and Locker have another distinction—first-round picks with losing records in college—which fortunately Allen doesn’t share. I don’t want to bury Allen with these comparisons, and he does have some high ceilings—moments, if not games, when he’s been brilliant—but he’s hit some low floors often too.

There’s one other comp that’s likely to be raised by some people: Like Allen, Carson Wentz came out of a second-tier program, in 
his case North Dakota State in the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision. But that’s where the parallels diverge. With knockout completion percentages (high 60s), school scoring records, two FCS National Championships, graduating with a 4.0 average, and a memorable Pro Day, Wentz rose to the number two pick in his draft class. He was taken by the Eagles and went on to set rookie records and have a dazzling second year that positioned Philadelphia for the Super Bowl (prior to his late-season injury). Josh Allen is not Carson Wentz, no matter how hard we wish it.

If I’m a coach and I find myself rationalizing the negatives—accuracy, completions, yards—or hoping for a fairy-tale ending, I tell myself to wake up. I don’t want to hitch my wagon to this kid if my job depends on it… 
and it always does
.

But despite the concerns, mine included, there were plenty of pluses, and the Bills took Allen. Now the question was: When will he play? Even though the team says they’re committed to not putting Allen in too early, they don’t have many options but to start him soon. They picked up A. J. McCarron from Cincinnati in March to replace Tyrod Taylor, but he was obviously a placeholder for their first-round pick. On paper, you’d think it looks positive that Allen is going to a team that was the seventh-ranked rushing attack in 2017. The problem is, a lot of that was due to (1) Tyrod Taylor, an agile running QB, (2) the protection of offensive guard Cordy Glenn, and (3) offensive tackle Seantrel Henderson. But (4) thanks to trades and free agency, they’re all gone.

So… the pressure will be on the big arm of Allen and the big target of wide receiver Kelvin Benjamin. To coach Sean McDermott, that combo looks and feels a lot like Cam Newton—strong arm, so-so throwing touch, but huge target(s). Will Allen be able to 
deliver in Buffalo like he did at Wyoming? He has determination. He has self-confidence. He had meager college offers but made the most of what he got. He played in the second tier of NCAA football but like Carson Wentz was taken in the first round. You have to like his grit and character, assuming it’s the mature version. Now let’s see if he has the NFL tools…

Pick number 10…
 The Bears and 49ers picked at number eight and nine, a linebacker and an offensive tackle. And then it was back to the quarterback show. Arizona has been through a lot of transition. Head coach Bruce Arians, a one-of-a-kind, colorful, demanding/nurturing, no bs, f-bombing guy, retired at age sixty-five after five years and the most wins in Cardinals history: fifty. Lasting five years—and leaving on your own terms—turns out to be well beyond the average head-coaching tenure (and the average is raised by Bill Belichick’s nineteen years at the Patriots, almost double anyone else). Arians said it was time to take a break from the game. (As it turned out, his break lasted one season, after which he signed on as head coach of the Bucs). Since Arians had surrounded himself with famously silver-haired assistants, lovingly called his “geezer staff,” GM Steve Keim was not inclined to promote from within. He hired Steve Wilks, defensive hotshot from the Panthers, who had impressed several teams the previous year. Getting him was considered a coup. And for Wilks, it was a chance to sit on a very hot seat, trying to succeed the almost legendary Arians, revitalize an aging team, and quickly turn a rookie quarterback into a star. That’s the job.

At the eleventh hour, Arizona had traded with the Raiders up to the tenth pick, likely to get ahead of the Dolphins, who might have had their eye on a quarterback to eventually, or soon, replace 
Ryan Tannehill. The Cardinals had an interesting set of circumstances at QB. After Carson Palmer’s retirement just prior to the draft, they signed Sam Bradford with a $5 million base salary plus a $15 million signing bonus, for a total guarantee of $20 million. It’s pricey but it’s also the going rate for a starting quarterback. And Bradford, a former overall number one pick, has had a disappointing, injury-plagued career that never lived up to its promise. Most importantly for Arizona, the way the deal is structured, the team is not on the hook for any money going forward, once the bonus is paid. That’s a perfect scenario to take the best available quarterback when your number comes up.

At this point in the draft, that’s clearly Josh Rosen. He put up some big numbers at UCLA, possesses picture-perfect form, has a few issues (but who doesn’t?)—an ego thing or huge self-confidence, depending on your point of view. But there’s no arguing, he has a ton of potential.

In Arizona, Rosen could sit behind Bradford, hopefully shut up, and learn from him and from offensive coordinator Mike McCoy (another guy on a hot seat). If, in the meantime, Bradford breaks out and performs well, great. And the Cardinals’ team overall may be the best suited to take a young quarterback, since they have a great returning running back in David Johnson (maybe second only to Le’Veon Bell), future Hall of Famer wide receiver Larry Fitzgerald, and a pretty good defense to contain opponents.

Here’s Josh Rosen, UCLA, pre-draft:

NFL COMBINE
: Physical: 6 ft. 4 in., 226 lbs. • 40 yd. dash: 4.92 secs. • Vertical jump: 31.0 in. • Broad jump: 111 in.
 • 3 cone drill: 7.09 secs. • 20 yd. shuttle: 4.28 secs. • NFL evaluation: 6.19, NFL instant starter

There’s a lot of hype around Josh Rosen. And for good reason. After graduating high school a year early to join UCLA, Rosen was the Bruins’ first-ever true freshman opening-day starter. Rosen’s mechanics are straight out of a coach’s dream tape, with his stride and throwing motion and his good arm action with a nice high release and bent knees. And he’s probably the best QB in this class when it comes to anticipation and timing throws; he throws when his wide receivers are open more than any other college QB, with accuracy and timing. He also has shown the ability to make a very good back-shoulder throw. I’m not ready to compare him to Aaron Rodgers, but you don’t see that type of back-shoulder throw very often. In terms of form, you could make a how-to manual for high school quarterbacks from tape of Josh Rosen.

More pluses
: He’s a good tennis player, and that shows in his footwork on the field. He has quick feet, gets to his drop quickly, and always appears to be on balance in his drop. That means he can elude rushers with a quick side step and be ready to throw. He also shows an ability to “climb the pocket” when necessary and doesn’t have much in the way of wasted movements, so he keeps the play timing on schedule. Rosen trusts his protection and keeps his eyes downfield for the most part.

Cautions
: While he does have good feet in the pocket, you’d never call him mobile or a running threat. He is a true pocket passer, and almost looks out of place when he’s running around. That said, you’d rather have him pass anyway. Accuracy and timing are big strengths of his game. In sharp contrast to Josh Allen, 
in 2017 Rosen threw with 63 percent accuracy when blitzed. And if you dig deeper into the stats, you see his overall percentage was hurt by thirty-one drops by pass catchers. (NFL receivers are going to hang on to the ball better.) So, while people were creating excuses for Allen’s weak completion percentage, Rosen, competing in a tougher conference, was consistently at or above 60 percent.

Being a West Coast guy, he has time both under center and in the gun. So we get plenty of tape to digest in play action and with his back to the defense. Rosen can give a good shoulder fake, or pump fake, to manipulate the defense.

Reality check
: He’s not a cannon like the other Josh. His arm strength is average to below average, and he sometimes struggles to drill a hard strike to the boundary lines.

Worries
: His freshman year was easily the most impressive of his three years at UCLA. He threw for 3,668 yards, 23 touchdowns, and only 11 picks, with a 60 percent completion record. The following season, he had only six starts before injuring his throwing shoulder and missing the rest of the season. Even in those six starts, he had ups and downs. Up: a 400-yard passing game. Down: Against Texas A&M, he threw three picks. He finished the short year with 10 TDs to 5 picks and dropped under 60 percent in completions. But he started out his junior year on fire: an opener with 491 yards, completing 35 of 59 passes, for 4 touchdowns and a 34-point comeback, followed by revenge against Texas A&M, then a career-high 5 TDs against Hawaii. After five games, he led the country in passing yards, offense, and TDs, and was projected in a mock draft to be the Browns’ number one pick. Then he got hurt again. This time it was a concussion, or two, or more. He came back in a tough loss to USC and Sam Darnold. Then, after UCLA 
won a slot at the Cactus Bowl, Rosen wasn’t medically cleared to play in the game.

Fair or not, injury concerns are a legitimate caution. Some players get hurt more than others. You might say concussions aren’t a measure of overall toughness, but in Rosen’s case, his slim build makes him vulnerable, and his injury history goes all the way back to his high school days.

Comps
: I’d liken him to Matt Ryan as a prospect—similar build and mechanics, with a true presence in the pocket for a passing game—but Ryan had to develop skills outside of the frame of the offense to really flourish. Right now, Rosen needs almost everything in the play to be “on schedule” (meaning “as planned”) for it to work. He lacks the on-field creativity you need sometimes. In college, Rosen often passed over early open reads, ones that he will need to take on early downs in the NFL. And I’d also compare, or rather contrast, him to Jay Cutler, another highly touted quarterback who fell in the draft. (More on that below.)

Bottom line
: His personality, character, style, whatever you want to call it, is the big question mark. Jim Mora, Rosen’s college coach, is on record saying that the Cleveland Browns should draft Sam Darnold as the number one QB in this class, not Josh Rosen. Pretty tough indictment from your own coach. Then Mora wrapped a bow around it by suggesting that Darnold was a better personality fit with the city of Cleveland: a grittier Cleveland blue-collar type of player. With friends like that… But Mora isn’t alone. One of my colleagues confided in me, “I remember being at UCLA and watching Rosen throw the ball and I’m thinking… he’s the best passer of all these guys, but I couldn’t get anybody to really vouch for the kid. Nobody, even coaches, really thought 
well of the leadership of the kid. Nobody vouched for his personality with teammates.” The more you read about Rosen, the more you heard scouts and coaches talking about how difficult he was to coach, more outspoken than some would prefer, and even perceived as too casual about football, all unfortunately feeding into the stereotype of the privileged California kid.

“With the tenth pick of the first round, the Arizona Cardinals take Josh Rosen…”
 The Cardinals need a quarterback; they have a respectable starter to mentor the next quarterback; the coaching staff is in sync on their plans; the team has a solid roster to support a new quarterback—as positive a situation for a rookie QB as there could be. It’s all good… except for Rosen himself. After “falling” to the tenth pick, Rosen stayed true to his petulant character… that ego thing. Rather than show gratitude to Arizona for taking him, he vented, saying, “I dropped and I was pissed.” He acknowledged the chip on his shoulder, tweeting, “There were nine mistakes made ahead of me.” And in case we missed the point, he soon elaborated: “And I will make sure over the next decade or so that they will know they made a mistake.” He just put an even bigger monkey, or target, on his own back and on his team.

That takes me back to my comparison to Jay Cutler, no offense to Jay. Despite a lot of record-setting in his college career at Vanderbilt, Jay Cutler fell to the eleventh spot in the 2006 draft and went to Denver. But ahead of him Vince Young out of Texas was taken third overall by Tennessee, and Matt Leinart from USC went tenth to the Cardinals. Both were Heisman Trophy winners but both had brief careers, with Young being declared one of the biggest first-round busts in history, and Leinart lasting only six seasons. There seems to be something—not something good—about being taken 
between number five and ten in the draft in the last twenty years: Sanchez, Leftwich, Tannehill, Locker, Gabbert, Leinart—all good, none great. Patrick Mahomes, also at number ten, is the big exception. When teams pass on a quarterback, it’s usually for valid reasons. Then some other team takes that guy out of “need,” and need is a terrible evaluator of talent. It makes you see things that aren’t there or things you wish were there. The point is, falling in the draft isn’t always so bad. And by the way, Cutler handled it graciously. Check out the video. Getting picked for the wrong reasons is much worse.

Still, plenty of experts rated Rosen as the best pure passer coming into the NFL. If… if… if he can mature mentally, he could be a great selection for the Cardinals. My advice, which he didn’t ask for: Josh, show what you can do on the field, not with your mouth. That’s a far better way to shut the critics up.

So far, four quarterbacks were taken in the first round. A pretty good haul. And that was it… almost. Twenty-one more picks went by. Miami didn’t take a quarterback, betting on Ryan Tannehill; nor did the Redskins, banking on Alex Smith; the Bengals stayed faithful to Andy Dalton; the Patriots—well, why would they do anything but stick with Mr. Immortality, Tom Brady; the Ravens seemed content with a now-healthy Joe Flacco; the Steelers believe Ben Roethlisberger is made of steel; the Jaguars still seemed okay with Blake Bortles… still? Nobody else took a first-round quarterback… until the 
very last pick
.

“With the thirty-second selection in the 2018 NFL Draft, the Baltimore Ravens take Lamar Jackson…”

Opinions on Lamar Jackson are as varied as those on Baker Mayfield. Some think he could be a transformational player with freakish speed and athleticism. Others think he is a limited thrower 
who will have a tough time staying healthy at the NFL level (an athlete who happens to play quarterback versus a quarterback who is an excellent athlete). Some even said maybe he should be a wide receiver. To his credit, Jackson dismissed that idea out of hand.

In the final draft of his career, soon-to-retire GM of the Ravens Ozzie Newsome did a masterful job. He managed to get not one but two very promising players. The Ravens traded back twice to the twenty-fifth pick to first take tight end Hayden Hurst from South Carolina. The Ravens like tight ends and have a good history with them—Shannon Sharpe, Todd Heap, Dennis Pitta (lost to injury after the 2016 season), and Ben Watson (gone to New Orleans in free agency). The Ravens were in the market to replace the 86 receptions Pitta had in 2016 or the 61 receptions Watson gave them in 2017. To most observers, after taking Hurst, the Ravens appeared to be done.

But most observers underestimated Newsome and his heir apparent, Eric DeCosta. There had been chatter that Sean Payton in New Orleans and Bill Belichick in New England, both visionaries in seeing how the college-style game may be taking over the NFL, were positioning themselves to take Lamar Jackson to eventually replace Drew Brees or Tom Brady. Barstool baloney, as it turns out. New Orleans made a dramatic move up to the middle of the first round, and NFL draft analyst Mike Mayock delivered an impassioned monologue about the foresight of Sean Payton, getting ahead of the league in taking Lamar Jackson to groom behind future Hall of Famer Brees. Impassioned, but wrong. The Saints took Marcus Davenport, an edge rusher from the University of Texas at San Antonio. New England, now positioned at number thirty-one, could show the same visionary prowess by taking Jackson to succeed future Hall of 
Famer Brady. Interesting, but again wrong. The Patriots took running back Sony Michel from Georgia. That left Philadelphia with the last pick of the first round, but with Nick Foles, who led the Eagles to their Super Bowl win, and likely a healthy Carson Wentz, they had no interest in taking a quarterback.

So the Eagles traded their first-round pick, even if it was number thirty-two, to the Ravens, who surprised everyone, including their franchise quarterback and Super Bowl winner Joe Flacco…

Taking the fifth QB of the first round, Ozzie Newsome was leaving the Ravens with their potential next-generation quarterback, Lamar Jackson. It was the biggest stunner of the 2018 draft. Would it work? Was it a legacy? Or just a hope?

Ozzie Newsome has had a remarkable career in the league, not only as a Hall of Fame player but also as a brilliant talent evaluator. I know; as a coach I benefited from his skills. Ozzie counts draft picks Ray Lewis, Ed Reed, Jonathan Ogden, Todd Heap, Terrell Suggs, Haloti Ngata, Marshal Yanda, Ray Rice, Joe Flacco, and C. J. Mosley among his stars, not to mention a slew of outstanding trades. But for all GMs, Newsome included, finding quarterbacks has always been a challenge. Some said Ozzie wanted to leave the team with a parting gift, and that was the selection of Jackson. Head coach John Harbaugh was second in the league in tenure (behind Belichick) but feeling the heat of owner Steve Bisciotti, who, after assuming that getting into the postseason was a given, had seen a drought in recent years. The previous season, Bisciotti had openly acknowledged he’d considered letting Harbaugh go. In case you think an owner won’t do that with a Super Bowl–winning head coach, let me personally tell you different. Same job, same owner, same championship—boom, pink slip. That’s a career in the 
NFL—as they say, Not For Long. And veteran Joe Flacco, who had been out with a bad back a good part for of the previous year, looked strong again but was getting up there in quarterback years. No time to panic, but a good time to look ahead. And perhaps leave a legacy.

What did the Ravens see in Lamar Jackson that others may have missed? First of all, the team was not drafting out of “need”—at least, they didn’t think they would have a need—which gives a team a lot of objectivity: No panic, we’re okay, a quarterback would be nice to have if we can find the right guy. About-to-retire GM Ozzie Newsome said, “It’s not like you’re really thinking, ‘Oh man, we’re going to draft a quarterback in the first round.’ We thought the team was going to be good enough that we would compete for the division with Joe… and you hate to use the high pick on a quarterback.” But there was something special they saw in Lamar. Eric DeCosta, who was about to inherit the GM reins, said, “Looking at so much data… comparing Lamar to Baker and Darnold and Rosen all at once… what sort of gave me more confidence was some data from PFF [Pro Football Focus] [that] looked at all of Lamar’s throws under pressure and… completion percentage and yards attempt-wise. And he was… at the tops of college football. It was he and Baker and then everybody else. That kind of stood out…” “Under pressure” is not a readily visible stat by itself. You have to look at real-time game film to see it in action. But it is the essence of what an NFL quarterback has to live with. Not throwing from clean pockets, but trying to keep a play together when the world is crashing down on you. If Lamar was good at that, DeCosta and Newsome knew it was a very good sign.

Eric thought hard about Lamar, not just looking at the obvious stats, but at the results behind them, what he might be able to 
project from what he saw. “It made me realize there was maybe a little bit more under the hood for Lamar Jackson than people really realized. It wasn’t just this athlete who could run around back there and make plays.”

Even though the Ravens weren’t going to use their first pick on a QB, the conversations around Jackson started to get serious… and more frequent. 
What would we do if we had this quarterback [Jackson]?… What will we look like?… How would we use him?… It’s clear we couldn’t force him into a Joe Flacco offense.
 In one of the early discussions, head coach John Harbaugh said, “If you take Lamar, we’ll build an offense around him.” That sounds innocent enough, but it is a big, big commitment. It was a green light to take Jackson. It meant being willing to change everything. John didn’t expect to have to make the change soon, but he showed he would embrace it, when and if it came. That’s not so common for head coaches. Maybe he was influenced by another voice in his ear. The off-the-record word around the Ravens facility was that owner Steve Bisciotti was open to a new quarterback.

The Ravens did one other thing. Nothing. That is, nothing that showed. They liked what they saw and sensed in Jackson, so they kept it to themselves. They made it a point not to talk to him too much at the Combine, not to let on to anyone that they were shopping him seriously. The last thing they needed was for another team to get curious about what the Ravens saw and decide to take a closer look.

Jackson was the last of the top five quarterback prospects still on the board. Earlier, some had ranked him as high as the top slot or the runner-up. But his strength was his weakness. Lamar is a running quarterback. Some say he’s a runner who can play quarterback. The NFL wants quarterbacks who can also run. It seems 
a subtle difference, but it isn’t. So, right or wrong, he fell in the draft… right into the Ravens’ lap.

Pre-draft look at Lamar Jackson, University of Louisville:

NFL COMBINE
: Physical: 6 ft. 2 in., 216 lbs. • 40 yd. dash: opted out • Vertical jump: opted out • Broad jump: opted out • 3 cone drill: opted out • 20 yd. shuttle: opted out • NFL evaluation: 5.91, will become NFL starter

In evaluating quarterbacks, you don’t dwell on NFL Combine results. You take a quick look to reinforce what you already know. One guy is tall and strong. Another guy can throw the ball eighty yards from his knees. This one is fast. That one has good footwork. You’ve seen them all in real games, on tape, so you know that what you see at the Combine doesn’t add much. That is, until you get a Lamar Jackson and realize what he 
didn’t
 do at the Combine. He opted not to run the 40 because everyone knew how fast he was from his career at the University of Louisville and his winning the Heisman Trophy in 2016. In fact, he opted out of all the drills. And, despite pressure to show his stuff as a running/receiving threat, he declined to work out at wideout because he was determined to be seen as a quarterback. He did not hire an agent; he relies on his most ferocious advocate, his mother. But—and this is important—he gave the most impressive, honest, open, powerful interviews at the Combine. He showed potential leadership in his demeanor and his words. Intangibles can be critical.

Now, about his abilities: Jackson’s TD-to-INT ratio was a solid 30 to 9 as a sophomore, 27 to 10 as a junior. But much like Josh 
Allen, the completion percentage just wasn’t there—56 percent as a sophomore, 59 percent as a junior.

Nonetheless, Jackson can be explosive. In his first game as a sophomore starter, against UNC Charlotte, he hit a career-high eight touchdowns, all in the first half. Then against Syracuse he had five touchdowns—four of which were rushing TDs—again, all in the first half. Same stats exactly facing Florida State, all in the first half. He’s such a threat on his feet, he even started one game at running back versus Auburn. His ability and willingness to run are both good and bad. He gets tackled and puts himself in danger, and he’s had too many turnovers.

No question, he did get better with each college season in terms of pocket poise and presence. When he didn’t see his first read, he didn’t automatically give in to the temptation to pull the ball down and scramble. He got better with his eyes, looking defenders off and then throwing to his read. But there’s no denying it: He’s at his best—and most exciting—when the play breaks down and he has to be creative and improvise. (He has time under center but most of his play fakes didn’t require him to turn his back to the defense like a traditional play fake in the NFL.) His drop and step back look almost casual on tape—not that he’s playing sloppy, but that he’s inconsistent, and too often gets narrow and tall so his deep ball is also inconsistent. He struggles with his touch to get the ball over the arms of dropping linebackers. It’s most often flat and high when he misses—sailing—and that leads to INTs in the NFL. For a QB on the run so often, you’d like to see him at his best when throwing off-platform, but his accuracy, at least so far, is worse when throwing on the run.

Comps
: Lamar gets touted as a clone of everybody from Vince 
Young to Michael Vick to Robert Griffin III to Deshaun Watson. With a cannon arm—flick of the wrist, like he’s barely trying, and then flinging it—plus running ability, Michael Vick is the obvious comparison. But Jackson is three inches taller and a little more polished than Vick was as a prospect. And Jackson has obvious playmaking skills. For me, his body type and big-time running ability are reminiscent of Robert Griffin III. Jackson had ten rushing touchdowns of forty-plus yards. He is literally a big play waiting to happen, but it can look a little chaotic out there before he hits the big one. With his pure speed, elusiveness, and vision in the open field, he makes it nearly impossible for defenders in pursuit. But he’s vulnerable. At six foot three and 200-plus pounds, he looks like he could carry another fifteen to twenty pounds in order to take the punishing hits his style of QB will incur on a game-by-game basis. And he has not shown a natural inclination to slide in the open field. Ask RG3: That’s not a good thing.

Bottom line
: Lamar Jackson is the type of player who is boom or bust on every play, and that can be an ulcer maker for a coach (and we don’t need any extra causes). Can you live with the two or three horrible plays in a drive, waiting for the one explosive play? For Jackson to be successful early, an offense will have to look much like the one the Texans built around Deshaun Watson in Houston: RPOs (run-pass options) and big plays mixed in with some easy throws. Jackson’s success will depend on what the coach is willing to do to build a scheme around him and how that coach can live with plays outside of the design of the offense… while waiting for the magic.

The scenario seems obvious. Since handing Joe Flacco a $120 million contract after their Super Bowl win against the 49ers, 
the Ravens have been a .500 team, making the playoffs only once in the last five years. John Harbaugh has a team owner who almost showed him the exit, and a quarterback in Flacco who appears to be healthy again but is also playing out his final contract year. It’s time to plan ahead. Because “ahead” tends to arrive sooner rather than later. Welcome Lamar. Joe Flacco is a soft-spoken man who will be polite and cordial to Jackson but will politely and cordially have zero interest in mentoring him.

More importantly and practically, this presents a dilemma for the Ravens’ coaches: What kind of offense do you start to implement for Jackson? The things you want to put in an offense for Jackson have no chance of being run by Flacco. And vice versa. The Ravens contend they see another Deshaun Watson in Lamar Jackson. Watson has the brightest future of any quarterback I can recall in the NFL, having quickly matured in 2017 in a way few could have imagined. He maintained his ability to make plays outside the pocket but developed remarkably quickly and effectively as a pocket passer as well. That’s what the Ravens see, or want to see, in Jackson. Great theory and plan. Here’s the caveat: Jackson does not appear to have the throwing ability of Watson. Like the quarterback picks from five to ten, the ones from twenty to thirty-two over the last twenty years are also telling. Other than Aaron Rodgers and Drew Brees, they’ve all been total whiffs as QB picks, some clearly worse than others—Johnny Manziel, Brandon Weeden, Brady Quinn (hmm, all picked by Cleveland). These prospects either fell to this range for good reason or moved up for bad reason, because of a desperation need by teams. They probably belonged in the second round or later. Again, with the exception of Aaron Rodgers. And there will definitely be those exceptions 
from time to time, the hidden gems. That’s what the Ravens and plenty of gurus envision in Jackson. Here’s the logic/wishful thinking: Flacco was a Super Bowl MVP, just like Brett Favre was before the Packers drafted Rodgers. So a hidden gem can replace a franchise quarterback… once in a while. The Ravens have Marty Mornhinweg—a smart, seasoned offensive coordinator—and a savvy assistant coach with deep quarterback experience, Greg Roman. Lamar Jackson plays a lot like Colin Kaepernick did when Roman was getting the most out of him in San Francisco. Put all the circumstances together and yes, we have the possibility of another Aaron Rodgers–like succession. Here’s the reality: There has been one Rodgers in the past twenty years. The rest of those late first-round picks have ranged from okay starters to solid backups to washouts. Lamar Jackson and the Ravens will be the most interesting of all the rookie quarterback scenarios we will see play out in the coming year. Maybe Aaron Rodgers. Maybe Brandon Who?

Overview post-draft

Each team that picked a QB saw the quarterbacks very differently; each saw someone they fell in love with, or they convinced themselves they were in love. The analogy to 2011 is fitting. That year, four quarterbacks were taken in the first round, two more in the second round. With one exception, objectively it was a good, not great group, but there was a classic NFL feeding frenzy for quarterbacks because of “need.” Cam Newton, the overall number one pick, was the exception: Rookie of the Year, an MVP, four postseason finishes, and a Super Bowl appearance. But many did not rank him as the top QB in the 2011 draft. The so-called experts put 
Newton behind Jake Locker, who went at number eight, and Blaine Gabbert, picked at number ten. Locker’s NFL record: four seasons, multiple injuries, mostly as a backup, win-loss stats of 9-14, and retired. Gabbert’s record: rookie-year bust, injured, traded, traded again, released, and signed with his fourth team, overall 11-34 win-loss stats. Then came Christian Ponder at number twelve: four seasons—all losing—then traded, traded, traded, and retired. In the second round, Andy Dalton and Colin Kaepernick were picked at thirty-five and thirty-six respectively. Arguably, Dalton and Kaepernick had careers better than all but Newton, with Dalton taking the Bengals to the postseason four times and Kaepernick—before his kneeling controversy—leading the 49ers to a Super Bowl. The whole process shows that “beauty is in the eye of the beholder”—or the eye of the wishful thinker.

In 2018, you could say each team that drafted a quarterback got the one (or one of the two) they wanted all along. Cleveland is obvious: They had the first pick. They got Mayfield, and despite internal squabbles, the powers that be wanted him. The Jets, if you were playing the odds, were likely one of the seventeen teams that had Darnold ranked number one, so they were thrilled to get him. Similarly, Allen could very well have been the Bills’ top choice, given his arm strength and what it takes to play QB in the weather conditions of Buffalo on a regular basis. Rosen, who some say is arrogant and some say is confident, but who all say has talent, fell a little, which had to make Arizona happy. And Jackson was a masterful/hopeful stroke on the part of the Ravens. Now it’s time to put the laboratory hypotheses to the test: the metrics and real-world games of the NFL.

