# II

---



II

What Is It About Quarterbacks?

Definition of 
quarterback—
noun

1. an offensive back in football who usually lines up behind the center, calls the signals, and directs the offensive play of the team

2. one who directs and leads

Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary

W
e know what a quarterback 
is
 and what a quarterback 
does
. So it should be simple to find one, right? Impossible is more like it.

Predicting quarterback success, to state the obvious, isn’t obvious. You’re looking at stats like completion percentage, adjusted total yards, and TDs to INTs, as well as assessments like level of competition, program style, throwing style, physical size, and intelligence. But you’re also looking for subjective characteristics that are much harder to quantify. 
Leadership
: What is that? Brash 
and loud or quiet and steady? Cool under pressure? Charismatic? 
Decision-making
 : Fast and instinctive or patient and unflappable? When things go right or go wrong? Seeing the whole field? Reading threats? Adjusting on the fly or sticking to plan? 
Command
: Fearless or measured? Total self-confidence? Follow-me-into-battle style? Selective amnesia—forgetting setbacks and moving on? Demanding or understanding? The fact is, it all depends. Different styles work for different people. With different teams. In different circumstances.

To get a little closer to cracking the code, to finding the Q Factor if there is one, we’re not only putting the 2018 quarterback draft class under the microscope; we’re also re-examining 
the way
 we appraise quarterback potential and success—evaluating the evaluators, separating the data that matters and the data that doesn’t, the metrics and the magic. If we can refine the search process even a little, fractionally or incrementally, it may be enough to spot the difference between good and really good or maybe even great, between precious salary cap dollars well spent and money burned, to result in a few more leaders and a few fewer washouts. For the next class. And the one after. Maybe we’ll even find a formula that provides a slight edge in spotting “quarterback types” in fields beyond football. Remember: You don’t have to double the S&P index to get rich; you just have to beat it by a few percentage points.

Prototypes

In every endeavor that demands a “quarterback,” whether it’s the football definition or the rest-of-life definitions, context changes, so the type of quarterback that “works” changes too. Those factors 
of leadership, decision-making, and command look and feel very different depending on the style of the individual, the times, and the circumstances. Sometimes you need a growling, gruff George Patton and sometimes a stoic, steady George Washington; sometimes a stirring, eloquent Winston Churchill and sometimes a pious, pacifist Mahatma Gandhi; a headstrong, egotistical Steve Jobs or a low-key listener Bill Gates; an inspirational, nonviolent Martin Luther King Jr. or an inspirational firebrand Malcolm X; a self-effacing, saintly Mother Teresa or a visionary stalwart Margaret Thatcher. It’s no surprise that we see the same “sometimes” situational variations in football. Sometimes you need a cocky “Broadway Joe” Namath and sometimes a Joe “Cool” Montana, sometimes an improviser like Peyton Manning, sometimes a Zen master like Tom Brady. You 
never
 need someone with self-doubt, who doesn’t live for battle, who might even prefer that someone else give the orders.

If everyone is looking for quarterbacks, in every part of life, where, when, and how do we find all these quarterback types? What’s the pedigree? If only we knew. Do we look for advanced degrees or street smarts—MBAs or prodigies, Heisman winners or hopefuls who declare early? The same enigma applies in business. Just like the promising QB prospects who enter the draft after their junior year, big-idea entrepreneurs often drop out of college to launch their start-ups, rather than wait until they’re more seasoned. Bill Gates quit school to found Microsoft. Steve Jobs left to create a little company called Apple. And Mark Zuckerberg walked away from Harvard to found Facebook and become the world’s youngest billionaire. And it applies to other sports too. Most major league baseball players skip college and go to the minor leagues. LeBron James was the number 
one draft pick in the NBA at age eighteen. We expect great “quarterback types” to come out of Harvard, Penn, Stanford business programs, NCAA Division I football, the Final Four, West Point, or the Naval Academy… but some don’t. Some just come on their own, from their parents’ basement, from high school, from backyard pickup games. And somehow we have to be able to spot them all.

We know that quarterbacks and quarterback types are critical to success… of teams, of companies, and of ideas. We know how literally game-changing the results can be when we find the real deal. And what a bust it is when we miss. No wonder we’re in a constant search to discover a better way to find them. If and when we do, it may not only change football, it may change the way we hunt for leadership across the board.

Beyond football—the other quarterbacks

When you build from football to parallels in other fields, can you evaluate the potential and ultimate success of “quarterback types”? How do corporate headhunters and boards of directors size up CEOs to compete, innovate, and deliver high profits? How about military leaders? Generals and admirals are a lot like quarterbacks. Only the stakes are higher. Does the prestige of an MBA program/level of play predict business success—is Harvard or Wharton or Stanford like the Pac-12, the SEC, or the Big 12? Or are public university students hungrier? In a study a few years ago, it turned out that more CEOs came from the University of Wisconsin than from the Ivys. Do the best military minds come from the academies or from the ranks? From combat simulations or the actual battlefield? Or are there no patterns at all?

How we search

We’re looking for a needle in a haystack… with high-powered magnifying glasses, night goggles, big data, and Ouija boards. We use all the tools we have—stats, films, more stats, coaches, awards, bowl games, more stats, and the Combine—plus anecdotal evidence (behavior on the field and off), plus our instincts (good and bad), plus all the proven and self-appointed experts. And we count on the draft process itself to push the best candidates to the top and let the others fall. It works… mostly… sort of. The draft usually does tell us who is good. But it does not tell us who will be great, who will become that elusive being, the franchise quarterback. If only it did. But in the process of spotting the good ones, can the draft actually miss great ones? Sure. Maybe.

Didn’t the draft miss Tom Brady? Or did we, the coaches, GMs, and scouts, miss him? First, consider the year 2000, Brady’s draft year. Clearly the “need factor” for quarterbacks was not dire that year and/or the class was not seen as being very rich in QBs. The Browns’ number one overall pick went to defensive end Courtney Brown… and he was called the biggest draft bust in Cleveland history (which is saying something, considering the Browns’ other misses). That year, lots of outstanding players were taken early—running back Jamal Lewis, wide receiver Plaxico Burress, linebacker Brian Urlacher—but no quarterbacks were selected until Chad Pennington at number eighteen by the Jets. And then no more in round one, none in round two, and finally a couple more in round three. That year, need didn’t drive quarterbacks up the ranks.

As for Tom Brady, his stats in college were actually very good, 
but they were sparse. He didn’t start his first two years at Michigan, and in years three and four, he had to split time with Drew Henson as a starter, so Brady played fewer games than scouts like to see. University of Michigan coach Lloyd Carr would often play Brady in the first quarter, Henson in the second, and then decide who would play the second half—a strange coaching method, to say the least. Ultimately, Brady became the starter, posting a 20-5 record over two seasons, beating Ohio State (a big deal in the Big Ten), and beating Alabama in the Orange Bowl (a big deal everywhere). Brady had a 300-plus-yard passing game and led Michigan to several fourth-quarter rallies, earning him the nickname “The Comeback Kid.” For his starting years, he had better than a 60 percent completion record. (For comps, that’s higher than Dan Marino, about the same as Peyton Manning, and slightly lower than Ben Roethlisberger.) The difference is, Brady not only played too few games, but when he did play, he was in a program that doesn’t like to throw the ball. Although he’s known as a great decision-maker in the NFL, it seems Brady may have made one bad decision. His college choices came down to Cal or Michigan, one a passing team (Aaron Rodgers and Jared Goff came out of Cal), the other a grind-it-out running team, and he picked Michigan. That, plus Carr’s odd coaching style and starting only two of four seasons so his stats were thin, camouflaged him in the draft. It may be that he’s not a miracle but that we coaches and GMs didn’t do our homework and just missed him. The word is that young Tom chose Michigan over Cal in order to put some physical distance into his maybe overly dependent relationship with his father. Good plan, but he might have considered Ole Miss, Tennessee, Florida, or any number of passing showcases. Michigan was a good team but hardly pass-happy. And they had 
that bizarre alternating-starter system. No, this was not an ideal platform for the potential of Tom Brady.

What if we looked harder and smarter?

Can’t we improve the evaluation process? Even a little? A little could mean a lot. If we could up the outcomes, even by an incremental amount—if we achieved a 5–10 percent plus factor—we could literally alter the fate of teams. Imagine if there was a better way to gauge “leadership.” What if we looked harder at a player’s character and behavior and values on 
and
 off the field, in the locker room, in the classroom, at home with his siblings, with his girlfriend, or the boss from his summer job. People can’t hide who they really are. But coaches and GMs tend to minimize what they don’t want to hear or know, and we talk ourselves into players. We may not be psychologists but we should be able to read people pretty well, pretty objectively, or we don’t belong in these jobs. We need to look hard at players and face reality. 
Yes, this guy can throw the ball the length of the field, but he’s immature and shows no signs of growing up… Hey, that guy was always the first one in and the last to leave, and he got better and better… Players like playing for that guy… This one is moody… That one is a loner… This guy can’t stay out of trouble.
 Wishful thinking will get you nowhere… nowhere near the playoffs, for sure. What if we could examine certain situational behavior—is he better when he’s ahead or behind, early in the game or late, under pressure or freewheeling? What if we assessed decision-making—sticking to the call, or improvising, or throwing the ball away? What about pure execution or outcome—making something happen even when things are going wrong? We 
could perhaps eliminate 5–10 percent of the draft busts, or maybe find 5–10 percent more stars. Imagine. Franchise quarterbacks instead of expensive backups. Bonuses paying off instead of being written off. Losing teams turning around in a season or two.

Data versus gut—brains versus beer

Not a tough choice: quant geniuses examining granular input to arrive at mathematically projectable outcomes or a bunch of fat scouts lying to each other over flat Buds about who looks like/walks like/smells like a quarterback. In the past few years, data analytics combined with science have caused us to re-examine so much of what we thought we knew. 
Freakonomics
 and 
Moneyball
 became best sellers because they turned conventional wisdom on its head and used data in whole new ways—digging deeper to explain successes and failures in sports, politics, social issues, and business. We’ve learned to measure things we thought were immeasurable—attention span, multitasking limitations, brain-side dominance, ethnic heritage, sleep deprivation effects, thinking speed, even artificial intelligence. Genetics can predict the sex, eye color, and hair color of a baby. Netflix’s and Amazon’s algorithms can tell us not only what we watch but what we will 
want
 to watch. Facebook shows us the ads we 
will
 like. VORP—value over replacement player—helps establish baseball players’ real worth. They’re not perfect indicators but they’re right more often than they’re wrong. Why not predictive data for a rookie quarterback’s NFL performance—how he 
will
 do? Why not a predictor of how quarterback X or Y will perform against a pro-style nickel defense? Or at the very least, could we cut down the tendency to rely on 
misleading, mythical gut indicators? 
He
 
looks
 
like a quarterback… He gives a good interview… He has a cannon for an arm… He’s got the “it” factor.
 We humans are attached to the idea that there are intangibles, things that calculators can’t calculate. That’s how we keep our jobs. Personally, I don’t think a computer can pick a quarterback better than I can… yet. But there has to be a better way than informed guessing.

Quarterback gurus

The first place to look to unravel the formula, or crack the code, is the people with good quarterback track records. The experts range from GMs and head coaches who have spotted and developed, albeit inconsistently, NFL franchise quarterbacks, to the specialist coaches who have worked one-on-one with the best in the game. They’re aided and/or hammered by the sharp-eyed, sharp-tongued sports media commentators who move players up and down the draft board as if it were their money and their teams. And now there are the fantasy football geeks who use analytics to assemble pretend teams that are better than any real teams, and the big-data whizzes who study football as a break from solving the world’s real problems.

The guy who wrote the book, literally

Probably the first quarterback “professor” was Bill Walsh, head coach of the San Francisco 49ers, who drafted Joe Montana in the third round of the 1987 draft and traded second- and fourth-round picks to Tampa Bay for Steve Young, landing two Hall of Famers. As a team 
assistant, I literally studied under Bill and he knew more about quarterbacks, or football for that matter, than anyone I’ve ever known. (Okay, like almost everyone else, he missed Brady in 2000.) With Walsh, I co-wrote his definitive football book, 
Finding the Winning Edge
. His insights on QBs were, and are, very telling. At the time it was written, the three top quarterbacks in the NFL were Troy Aikman, Brett Favre, and Steve Young, each with very different physical and mental makeup. Here are some of the observations Bill and I made:

“… A logical argument can be made that no position on an NFL team is more important than the quarterback.”

• To make success at the position even rarer, only some of the abilities demanded can be taught; the others are God-given.

“One of the most obvious requirements for a quarterback is the ability to pass.”

• Obviously, a quarterback who is a poor passer has virtually zero chance to make it in the NFL. But “arm strength” and passing success are, or can be, miles apart, pun intended. Some players can heave a ball almost the length of the field, but can’t hit their targets, close, far, or in-between.

• Passing has three essential elements: accuracy, timing, and “touch”—that is, making the throw “catchable.”

• And the quarterback must have a quick delivery—not hurried, but smooth, without excess motion. It can be refined through practice, but it helps to have been born with good 
“motor skill.” Every play is basically a race between the QB’s motion and the defenders’ time to stop him.

• What is “touch”? On most passes—not quick flips or long bombs—the ball has to be thrown in such a way that the receiver can pull it in without breaking stride, so he can grab it on the run and get the maximum gain. Walsh knew that well since he worked and won with probably the best touch passer in the game, Joe Montana.

“Successful quarterbacks also have the ability to read defenses.”

• By and large, quarterbacks don’t learn that skill in college ball. To make matters worse, defenses in pro ball are bigger, faster, and smarter.

• But looking hard at a prospect’s game tapes sometimes uncovers the rare kid who can spot not just his primary receiver but his secondary, or even third/emergency guy… fast. That kid might be NFL material 
if…

• … he can avoid an NFL-level pass rush. That requires mobility and a sixth sense. A quarterback under pressure in the pocket must move and still keep the play intact.

“… Because of the dynamic role that a quarterback plays… he must have physical, mental, emotional, and instinctive traits that go well beyond his ability to pass the football.”

• He has to be competitive, not just a guy who likes to win, but a guy who 
has
 to win, who lives and dies with every game. And he has the guts/moxie/courage to get it done.

• His team and his coaches have to believe in him; they have to believe he can do just about anything. Especially in the face of pressure, especially when behind, especially when the game hangs in the balance.

• The quarterback’s “intestinal fortitude” has to supersede doubt. Walsh would often cite two of the best as examples of this, Bart Starr and Bob Griese.

“A great quarterback also has excellent instincts and intuition.”

• He has to have a “feel” for the game—another example of an intangible but mandatory quality for a quarterback. It’s not just the plays, the Xs and Os, or the shorthand written on his wrist card. It’s a lot more.

• It’s nuance—the subtleties of reading a defense, a slight shift, an audible, a step back, even a look. Great quarterbacks seem to come out of the womb with that intuition. Coaches can’t teach it.

• Walsh called it “instinctive genius”—when a great quarterback just makes “the right call at the right time.”

“Finally, quarterbacks must have the ability to function at an appropriate level while injured.”

• NFL players get hurt. It’s a rougher game than college. And the season is twice as long, doubling the chances to get hurt.

• With bigger, better, tougher defenses than in college, quarterbacks face more punishment and bodily abuse, but are expected to withstand it and still play.

As brilliant as he was, Bill Walsh didn’t give himself a lot of credit for his quarterback success; he gave it to the quarterbacks. He said he was “extremely fortunate” to work with the likes of Greg Cook, Virgil Carter, Ken Anderson, Guy Benjamin, Steve Dils, Dan Fouts, Joe Montana, and Steve Young. For the record, and record books, that’s two All-Americans, four NFL MVPs, and three Hall of Famers. I’d give Bill some credit.

Mentors, sages, and whisperers

There are a handful of experts who have had notable success with quarterbacks, among them David Cutcliffe, who coached Peyton Manning at Tennessee and Eli Manning at Ole Miss and recently Daniel Jones at Duke. He worked personally with Peyton on his comeback after neck surgery, preparing him for his return to pro football and a Super Bowl win for the Broncos. Quite a record of nurturing quarterbacks. As far as finding a high-level QB, he did recruit Eli Manning to Ole Miss. But he’s never been an NFL coach or a GM, so he’s never had to draft a pro QB. That’s a whole other level of pressure.

Quarterback “whisperer” Bruce Arians worked with Peyton Manning at the Colts, Ben Roethlisberger at the Steelers, returned to the Colts and coached rookie Andrew Luck, then moved to Arizona, a last hurrah (almost) and a comeback for Carson Palmer. At the end of the 2017 season, at age sixty-five, Arians retired from the Cardinals. Then he “unretired” to try to work his magic at Tampa Bay with Jameis Winston, their promising but as yet disappointing 2015 number one draft pick.

In his career, Arians is given credit for inspiring a young Peyton Manning to go no-huddle to get over his case of nerves, with 
getting Browns journeyman quarterback Kelly Holcomb to play like an All-Pro for at least one season and one postseason, and with coaxing one more “up” out of the up-and-down career of Carson Palmer. That’s some résumé with quarterbacks. How will he do with Winston? In a peek ahead to 2019, so far, it's been a struggle—lots of yards passing (5,100) but way too many interceptions (30). But taking chances is part of the Arians playbook. His signature phrase is “no risk it, no biscuit”: Play aggressively; give the quarterback two plays on every snap; create trust between quarterback and coach and team. Break down the coach-player wall, relate as peers, and have a drink—he says he learned his most important lessons in human nature while bartending.

There’s no argument; he’s brilliant. But he never drafted a quarterback. He worked with what he got, but he didn’t pick them. What can he teach us? A powerful quarterback track record, but as for draft success, it’s hard to say, since Arians retired from the Cardinals after going 8-8 in 2017, before Arizona had to make a 2018 QB draft pick.

So, there are clearly some guys who know how to groom and nurture quarterbacks, but does anybody really know how to find one?

Well, there’s Ron Wolf, the GM of the Packers who in 1992 traded a first-round pick to Atlanta to get their backup, a guy named Brett Favre, who became a three-time MVP and an eleven-time Pro Bowler, with five NFC Championship games and two Super Bowl appearances. That was an inspired, brilliant move. Wolf knew talent when he saw it. But just to be safe, Wolf drafted a quarterback in seven of the next eight drafts. That’s right. He had Brett Favre as his starter and he kept looking for quarterbacks. 
Four of his picks started for other teams, including Mark Brunell, who became a three-time Pro Bowler for the Jaguars, and Matt Hasselbeck, who did the same as a Seahawk. Ron was unquestionably good at picking quarterbacks, although Wolf himself acknowledges his whiffs. In 1994, he was confident Heath Shuler out of Tennessee (third overall pick by the Redskins), was going to be great. Was he? Well, suffice to say, he made far too many “all-time busts” lists (but fortunately went on to a more distinguished career as a U.S. congressman). And of course, Wolf, like most of us, missed Tom Brady in 2000.

What did Ron look for in a QB? In the end, as Wolf said on SI.com, “It’s blind luck. If I knew how to put together a quarterback, I’d have my own island somewhere.” He may be a bit humble, but his combination of analysis, experience, and yes, some luck, did better than most. Ron Wolf’s mentee, John Dorsey, who worked under him in Green Bay, has a pretty good record too. As director of college scouting, he helped the Packers spot Aaron Rodgers, who was falling in the 2005 draft; then as GM in Kansas City, Dorsey traded picks to the 49ers for Alex Smith, and in 2017 traded up to number ten to get Patrick Mahomes. Dorsey moved to Cleveland as GM, traded picks to Buffalo for Tyrod Taylor, and in 2018 drafted Baker Mayfield as the overall number one. Dorsey seems to know how to draft quarterbacks. But he doesn’t seem to stay with the teams once they take that quarterback.

Fantasy football and PhDs

Maybe the fantasy football geeks and math nerds know better than the scouts, coaches, and GMs. They don’t have their careers riding 
on their prognostications, so maybe they can be dispassionate and clinically accurate. Fantasy football runs entirely on stats and has become almost as large an industry as the NFL. And ever since nerds became the new cool kids, building mathematical predictive models has become one of the great avocations of professors who love data and sports. Like the rest of us, on Sundays they need a diversion, in their cases, from economic forecasts, population and mortality tables, and other dry but more important stuff.

Functional mobility—formula for prediction?

Lots of studies have been done in an attempt to analyze quarterback success 
after the fact
—did they live up to their hype? Few have successfully forecast future performance. Math professor Alexandre Olbrecht (executive director of the Eastern Economic Association at Ramapo College, New Jersey) and grad student Jeremy Rosen (Georgetown University) have come up with a methodology that attempts to predict each draft pick’s likelihood of success in the NFL, based on a skill set called “functional mobility.” “Functional mobility” is a phrase they credit to Doug Farrar in an SI.com article, in which he explained it this way: “When we talk about functional mobility, we’re not talking about quarterbacks running to run… Instead, functional mobility can better be summarized as the work a quarterback does in and just around the pocket—the boxing ring–sized area in which the truly great passers do much of their work.”

Rosen and Olbrecht took Doug’s initial observation and turned it into a metric. Using each prospect’s college stats, they have devised a formula combining a quarterback’s (a) run-completion 
ratio and (b) yards per rush, to come out with a projected (c) average net yards gained per passing attempt (ANY/A). If the (a) ratio is low, meaning less tendency to run, that usually correlates with a higher completion percentage, and if it is then combined with a high number of yards per rush (b), it means the prospect is inclined to pass, is accurate, but 
can
 run when necessary, resulting in (c) higher average yards gained per play by that quarterback. If his tendency is to run, though his yards per rush may be good, it 
can
 mean his completion and accuracy numbers in the NFL will not be not so good. Previous assessments have relied heavily on completion and/or accuracy but ignored the value of rushing when needed. How good are the math guys? Here’s a snapshot of their predictions: Adjusted Net Yards per Attempt, at the end of March 2018 (in the context of PI or Predictive Interval, the range of career-long ANY/A). Most telling are their comments and evaluations that follow.

2018 Predictions

Quarterback:
 Sam Darnold

Our ANY/A:
 5.93

95% PI, Low:
 4.05

95% PI, High:
 7.81

Quarterback:
 Josh Rosen

Our ANY/A:
 5.32

95% PI, Low:
 3.44

95% PI, High:
 7.20

Quarterback:
 Baker Mayfield

Our ANY/A:
 5.27

95% PI, Low:
 3.42

95% PI, High:
 7.13

Quarterback:
 Josh Allen

Our ANY/A:
 5.02

95% PI, Low:
 3.15

95% PI, High:
 6.90

Quarterback:
 Lamar Jackson

Our ANY/A:
 4.97

95% PI, Low:
 3.06

95% PI, High:
 6.88

Quarterback:
 Kyle Lauletta

Our ANY/A:
 4.91

95% PI, Low:
 3.04

95% PI, High:
 6.79

Quarterback:
 Mason Rudolph

Our ANY/A:
 4.80

95% PI, Low:
 2.93

95% PI, High:
 6.67

Quarterback:
 Luke Falk

Our ANY/A:
 4.65

95% PI, Low:
 2.77

95% PI, High:
 6.53

 

“Sam Darnold receives our highest projection… Since he is good in both categories—that is, a pocket passer who can run well when necessary—he would receive our highest projection even 
if we didn’t consider scouting grades. On the other hand, Josh Rosen’s high scouting grade is the main reason he comes in second. While he has the lowest run-completion ratio of any quarterback this year, only Luke Falk is a worse runner. But most scouts believe Rosen’s exceptional passing talents are enough to overcome his lack of mobility. Although Baker Mayfield is less of a pocket passer than Darnold, he is an above-average runner, and he has this year’s highest completion percentage. His performance-based statistics are more impressive than Darnold’s, but… we prioritize functional mobility over those statistics… On the other hand, scouts like Josh Allen better than we do… Allen’s low completion percentage gives him this year’s second-highest run-completion ratio, and he is not a good enough runner to make up for it… In fact, without scouting grades, he would get our lowest projection…

“Of the remaining quarterbacks, that is, those with lower scouting grades, we like Lamar Jackson best… Jackson is a dual-threat quarterback with more rushing attempts than completions and many more rushing yards per attempt than his peers. While he struggles with accuracy, he is a good enough runner to make plays in the NFL provided he stays healthy.”

A little better is worth a lot

How did Rosen and Olbrecht do versus reality? How valid is functional mobility? How predictive? Spoiler alert: As the next two seasons show, and as we analyze in this book, it looks like they came out about fifty-fifty, maybe a little better—that is, a little better than half right and half wrong. And 
the ways
 in which they were right are important. 
Being mobile and functioning well while mobile is a credible label for what works, or breaks down when not working, in the NFL.
 What quarterbacks do within the confines of the pocket, or when forced or purposely moving out of the pocket, the combination of running and passing, the ability to keep plays alive and advance the ball no matter how, were the critical factors in each of these quarterbacks’ successes or failures.

The lesson—the glaring lesson—is that as hard as we work, or think we work, to analyze/prognosticate/divine/wish/pray who will be the next golden boy, we could do better. We could apply more discipline and less sheer hope and desperate need. We could force ourselves to be more objective and less emotional, to really see and hear and learn. More discipline, more study, more objectivity, more film, more listening (and less talking to ourselves), more reality, more trends (and fewer highlights), may not make the outcomes quantumly different. But it all may add up to making the outcomes statistically different—a better draft pick or a lesser one left unpicked, fewer lost salary cap dollars, one more win, one less loss—because remember, teams get into the playoffs by win-loss ratios; that is, statistics. The team that gets a wild card spot is only one game better than the team that just missed, and that wild card team only had to put up one more point than the team they beat, which may have come from one more first down, from one more good play—a slant pass or scramble or designed run or Hail Mary—from the quarterback they chose over the one they passed up. And by the way, ten wild card teams have made it to the Super Bowl, and six have won it. I know; I got to hold up the trophy in 2000 with the Ravens. Statistics. A little better is worth a lot.

Now let’s take a candid look at how we’ve been sizing up quarterbacks, and maybe how we could view them more honestly and more accurately, and make better picks.

