# III

---



III

Billick’s Extrapolations: Observable, Projectable Trends… Not Wishful Thinking

W
hich, if any, analytics or evaluation or crystal ball can we apply to the process of drafting a future franchise quarterback or evaluating a rookie to up the outcomes even a little, since a small improvement over the norms can mean a lot? What methodology can help us get closer to the elusive Q Factor, if there is one? 
Extrapolation.
 For me, after years of living and breathing the game, assistant coaching, head coaching, studying other coaches and countless players, watching and rewatching games, dissecting plays, going to the Combine, interviewing, winning, losing, learning from success, learning more from failure, the answer is extrapolation. By dictionary definition, it means “forming an opinion or reaching a conclusion through reasoning and information.” What it means to me is 
using what you know to help tell you what you don’t know
. The data available and the trends in the data are trying to show what is likely to happen, but we tend to ignore what we see. And it is 
likely
 to happen. Not certain. Likely 
or probably is different than for sure. That’s why we have probability, not for-sure-ability.

Hey, what about instinct? Am I supposed to ignore what my instinct says? No. Data and trends are not the opposite of instinct. On the contrary, they’re what inform instinct, or should. Instinct is not a shot in the dark, hoping for a miracle. Good instinct is nothing more than an accumulation of your experiences. 
I have seen this before, and it did/did not turn out well… I know this formation; this is what’s going to happen… I was fooled by this once before, but not again.
 To borrow from Colin Powell and his Thirteen Rules of Leadership, Rule 6 is: “Don’t let adverse facts stand in the way of a good decision. Superior leadership is often a matter of superb instinct. When faced with a tough decision, use the time available to gather information that will inform your instinct.” He also believes in the 40-70 principle of decision-making. Get at least 40 percent of the information available before you make a decision. But… if you have 70 percent of the data, don’t get paralyzed into indecision and lose an opportunity while you’re trying to gather the other 30 percent. No amount of data will make the decision for you. You have enough. Strike now. Your competitor isn’t going to wait.

You reach your conclusions based on hard observation, on what you’ve learned, on what you know, not on what you hope for, not on what might happen once in a while, sometimes, when the wind is blowing just right and the stars are aligned. Here’s a guy who has thrown a lot of picks. Every year in college. He won a lot of games but he has an accuracy problem. That isn’t likely to get better. On the other hand, here’s another guy who threw a lot of picks in high school—kids do that—but then threw fewer his first year in 
college, but still too many, then fewer still by his senior year. And he also won a lot of games. That extrapolates to a positive trend or direction. Not enough, by itself, to draft him high, but enough to keep him in the running, to look at along with other factors and then extrapolate further.

Everything takes you back to the film

Stats, analytics, scouting reports, hearsay, and the Combine are good indicators, but the truth is told in the game films. Not highlights or one great game, but hour after hour, game after game.

If a guy is good, it keeps showing up. If a guy has a weakness, it keeps showing up. If you look hard enough at the evidence, without emotion if possible, you can extrapolate from all of the relevant components. Not just the physical attributes or game stats, but even decision-making, maturity, and leadership. You have to watch endless hours of film on a prospect, play after play—routine plays, broken plays—down after down, good and bad, not just glory moments supplied by his parents or old coach or new agent. You want to see him when things go well and when they don’t.

The same goes for his behavior. If a kid got in trouble off the field in high school but seemed to rise to the occasion in college, that’s a good sign. Kids get in trouble and kids grow up. But if you see a kid, no matter how talented, how athletic, how accurate, how good on the field, who is bad off the field, year after year, warning after warning, run from that kid. He may tell you in an interview that now he’s ready to be a model citizen, but the trend isn’t there. Could he do an about-face? Sure, it happens. But can you afford 
to bet a high draft pick and a pile of money on it? No. It doesn’t extrapolate. Don’t misunderstand me. Kids change, and I am the greatest believer in the world in second chances, even third and fourth chances. But you need some evidence of change, of progress in the right direction. If you see signs that a positive pattern is emerging, by all means extrapolate from it. Carefully.

Data alone is dangerous

Way back when I worked for Bill Walsh at the 49ers, we knew enough to pay attention to data, but to not become slaves to it. We knew it was hard to resist. But sometimes more data, instead of being good, is the opposite. Or, as we warned ourselves back then, “When a certain critical mass of data accumulates to support a course of action, that course of action becomes inevitable whether or not it makes 
common sense
.” We didn’t call it extrapolation. We called it common sense—gather the 
relevant
 data and put it together with experience and judgment, and then decide.

Today I say, “Look at all the data, the stats, the film,” and I add, “Do it as dispassionately as you can. Conclude from the cumulative evidence you see.” I repeat: not what you want to see, but what you do see. I’m the first to confess, I didn’t always do that when I was coaching. Maybe I had too much information. Maybe I should have reminded myself of what I learned with Bill Walsh, what I later coined as my own phrase on the subject, “The seduction of information grows in direct proportion to the amount of information available.” Or maybe I was swayed by other people whose enthusiasm or optimism could be contagious. I wanted/needed a quarterback so bad, I sometimes got exactly that, a bad 
quarterback. Maybe I didn’t go back to the film as much as I should have. Or maybe I turned a blind eye to what the film was trying to tell me and saw only the evidence that supported what I wished for. 
Forget those passes he over- or underthrew. Forget the open receivers he didn’t see. Forget how many balls he had to throw away. But look at this one picture-perfect completion.
 I didn’t extrapolate as much as I should have. Extrapolation works. How well? Better than pure data in a vacuum ignoring trends. Better than wishful thinking. Better than a lot of picks made these days. Not perfect. Better.

“Those managers best able to sift quickly and insightfully through the vast debris of data—let’s call it the 
infolanche
—will be winners, while those who keep wanting more for its own sake will end up paralyzed.” I learned that from Bill Walsh a long time ago. I need to reread it from time to time.

The opposite of synergy

Don’t get me wrong. Data is important. It tells us a lot. Wins and losses, pure completion percentage, height, weight, arm strength, yards per catch, passer rating—they’re all valuable individual stats. Obviously, a guy who has a strong arm is better than a guy who has a weak arm. But there is a phenomenon we fall prey to that I call the opposite of synergy—or the danger of data-only.

First let’s go back to synergy and what it is supposed to mean: 
The whole is greater than the sum of the parts
. For instance, you put together a bunch of parts like cylinders and pistons and rods and belts and batteries and fans that individually can only perform limited functions, but assembled properly create a combustion engine that can power a four-thousand-pound automobile. 
Conversely, one of my favorite phrases describes what I learned the hard way: 
Sometimes the whole does not equal the sum of the parts
. I apply it to quarterbacks who possess a lot of good traits and stats but somehow they don’t add up to a total quarterback.

When I was head coach of the Ravens, I saw it with one player in particular—Kyle Boller—but I realized it applies to so many. Boller came out of high school passing for almost 5,000 yards and 59 touchdowns. At Cal, he passed for almost 8,000 yards and 64 touchdowns, the second most TDs in school history. He was six foot three, 220 pounds, smart, engaging, and California handsome. He looked like a quarterback; he acted like a quarterback; he threw like a quarterback—practically the length of the field as a demo during the Combine; and he set records. What could go wrong? What was missing? Well, trends. A closer look at his stats reveals that he actually had only one great year in college, his last. The other three years ranged from poor to okay, with way too many interceptions (number eleven all-time in the Pac-10). His completion percentage was similar, from poor to fair, with one acceptable, not outstanding, final year at 53 percent. We looked at the good numbers—total passing yards and total TDs, his body, his arm. We talked ourselves into believing that one good college season was the beginning of a new trend and not an aberration in the older, established one. We talked ourselves into chalking up his accuracy issues to a lack of quality receivers. We gave in to wishful thinking. We weren’t alone. The draft experts had him touted to go early to mid-first round. The Bengals, Jaguars, and Bears were all hunting for quarterbacks. We grabbed Boller at number nineteen. Unfortunately, when he got to the NFL is when the real trends emerged. He was plagued by injuries, but when he did play, 
his TD-to-INT ratio was either upside down or nearly one-to-one at best. His completion percentage hovered in the fifties and his passer rating in the seventies.

Since then, I’ve seen it happen over and over with all kinds of players, but mostly with quarterbacks. It may sound counterintuitive since probably no position is measured by as many stats, but quarterback is the least quantifiable position on the field. The numbers are there and they matter… but they don’t determine. They point but they don’t promise. Pay attention, but don’t overpay. That’s what makes arriving at the Q Factor so elusive.

Too many quarterbacks possess good individual parts, but when assembled, those parts don’t make an engine. Why? Well, we could say a guy was missing the great intangible, the “it” factor, but the truth is, we—the scouts and coaches—looked at the pieces, especially the pieces we liked, but we didn’t always dig deeper for the worrisome patterns or the absence of positive trends. We saw what we wanted to see and/or we made excuses. We didn’t extrapolate.

A tale of two Russells

Two classic examples of 
not
 extrapolating properly were JaMarcus Russell and Russell Wilson. Actually, Russell Wilson’s 2012 quarterback draft class is a study in itself.

But let’s start with LSU quarterback JaMarcus Russell, the top pick of 2007, who also has the dubious honor of being one of the all-time (as in, worst) draft busts. In a class that included talent like Calvin Johnson (six-time Pro Bowl wide receiver, NFL single-season receiving record—1,964 yards), Joe Thomas (ten-time Pro Bowl offensive tackle), Adrian Peterson (seven-time Pro Bowl 
running back, NFL single-game rushing record—296 yards), Patrick Willis (seven-time Pro Bowl middle linebacker), Marshawn Lynch (five-time Pro Bowl running back—10,000-plus rushing yards), Joe Staley (six-time Pro Bowl offensive tackle), and Greg Olsen (three-time Pro Bowl tight end, over 8,000 receiving yards)… among all of those future stars, JaMarcus Russell was taken number one overall by the Oakland Raiders. Why? Because as much talent as that draft class had, what it lacked was a distinguished group of quarterbacks. Brady Quinn was the only other first-round quarterback pick (number twenty-two), playing four seasons for five different teams.

Just because the talent pool is thin doesn’t mean the demand for quarterback talent isn’t high. No rule says talent coincides with need. So a team desperate for a quarterback could hardly be blamed for reaching for JaMarcus. Especially considering Russell’s seeming pluses: He had a stellar high school career, was awarded an honorable mention in 
Parade
 magazine’s All-America football team, was heavily recruited for college, physically looked like a quarterback at six foot six, went to LSU, and was highly productive at a major program. He had college career completions of over 60 percent, a ratio of 52 TDs to 21 INTs, and a final year of over 3,000 yards and completions at almost 68 percent. He led some breathtaking comebacks—one against ASU, one against Alabama, and another against Tennessee, that one capped by a fifteen-play, eighty-yard drive and a final touchdown throw with under ten seconds on the clock for a 28–24 win.

Oakland was not alone in swooning over Russell. Almost every team in the league saw him as a can’t-miss pick. (Boy, there’s a dangerous expression—can’t-miss pick—it almost begs to backfire.) I 
was with the Ravens, and I confess, we had him rated higher than any other quarterback in my nine years there.

How did Russell do with the Raiders? Well, how did Russell Crowe do at singing his way through 
Les Misérables
? A famous actor—handsome, macho, great box office draw—and here comes a juicy role. What could go wrong? Everything. No one extrapolated that Crowe had a great range in acting but zero in singing. And no one extrapolated that as much God-given talent as JaMarcus Russell might have had, he wasn’t driven, disciplined, obsessed enough to play football at the pro level. You have to want it bad because, if you don’t, there are guys just waiting to take your head off, cut your legs out from under you, disrupt your game plan, pick off your passes, and toss you to the ground like an empty bag. (They don’t call it a sack for nothing.) You have to want it bad because there’s a guy waiting to take your place the moment you stumble. You have to want it bad because they pay you a lot and expect you to give up your body, mind, and soul to earn the money. To state the obvious, it’s hard.

Russell played only three years in the NFL, and really not much during those seasons. The word was that he just wasn’t motivated enough. He was plenty motivated to land a big contract, holding out on the Raiders long enough to miss the first game of the season, eventually signing a contract with an upside of $68 million and $32 million guaranteed. (Compare that with Cam Newton’s or Andrew Luck’s rookie contracts, each a little over $20 million with $14-plus million in bonuses.)

JaMarcus was used to having success come easy but lacked the work ethic demanded in the NFL. He was constantly out of shape, overweight—by as much as fifty pounds—and mentally 
unprepared. All in, Russell had a 31-game NFL career, with an upside-down TD-to-INT ratio—18 to 23. Cut loose after 2009, he never played another snap. He tried some comebacks but they all fizzled. Teams worked him out but none were convinced he had the stuff to play.

Weren’t there any early warning signs? Had we all misjudged him? Had success come so effortlessly that he could skate by in high school and college without discipline? Or had he been disciplined back then but lost it later on? There was one clue that we all should have noted. Lions GM Matt Millen interviewed JaMarcus Russell and said the whole time they talked, Russell kept looking at his watch. Millen finally asked him if he had to be somewhere else. Russell said no and seemed, for a moment, to pay attention. Then, a few seconds later, during the next round of questions, Russell was looking at his watch again. Millen had seen enough. Draft prospects take these interviews seriously, or should. They’re auditions. There’s a lot at stake: They have five or ten minutes to put forward their best selves—dressed up, prepared, polite, up on the team they are visiting, sharp and focused. Russell was sending all the wrong signs. Millen told him they were done. He then picked up the phone and told Lions head coach Rod Marinelli the team should use their first pick to take Calvin Johnson and not waste it on this kid whose head wasn’t in the game, which turned out to be a good move for Detroit. Millen even tried to warn Raiders owner Al Davis. But instead of extrapolating, the Raiders let need overrule observation.

How about the other Russell, Russell Wilson? The situation is almost the diametric opposite. Russell was an accomplished 
college quarterback at North Carolina State, then transferred to become a star at Wisconsin. But he was the seventy-fifth pick (third round) in the 2012 draft. Why was he missed? To begin with, this quarterback class was a pretty rich one—enough to satisfy the QB appetites of a lot of teams. Eight quarterbacks became eventual NFL starters, four from the first round—Andrew Luck, number one; Robert Griffin III, number two; Ryan Tannehill, number eight; Brandon Weeden, number twenty-two. Why did they all go well ahead of Wilson? Must be the stats, right? Luck had lights-out numbers—9,400 passing yards, 67 percent completion, 82–22 TDs to INTs, and 950 rushing yards. No argument, he was the top guy. Griffin also had great numbers—10,000 passing yards, 66 percent completion, 78–17 TDs to INTs, and almost 2,200 rushing yards. Tannehill, who had gone from wide receiver to quarterback, only had one full season under center—3,700 yards passing, 61.6 percent completion, 29–15 TDs to INTs, and 306 rushing yards. Good numbers for a single season but not much to extrapolate from. Brandon Weeden—two full seasons at quarterback with 9,200 passing yards, almost 70 percent completion, 71–26 TDs to INTs, and a net negative 150 rushing yards. Okay, don’t run, Brandon. All impressive stats.

So maybe it’s no wonder Wilson fell in the draft. Maybe he didn’t measure up. What were his numbers? He had 11,700 total college career passing yards, with 8,500 in three years at North Carolina State and 3,100 at Wisconsin. He also hit almost a 73 percent completion rate once he got to Wisconsin and far better receivers than at NC State. Over his college years he had 109–30 TDs to INTs and 1,400 rushing yards. Hold on! He had more passing yards than any of the others, comparable completion 
percentage, a better TD-to-INT ratio, and rushing yards exceeded only by Griffin. But he went at number seventy-five in the third round? Why? Well, we didn’t extrapolate what we should have and we did extrapolate what we shouldn’t have. Wilson showed that he could play quarterback brilliantly, not for a season or two, but for four years. He showed he could do it in a good program at NC State and a better program at Wisconsin, with a better receiving corps around him. He did it with his arm, notching big passing numbers. And he did it with his legs, racking up a lot of rushing yards. But—here’s the but—he was only five foot eleven. Quarterbacks are supposed to be six four, six five, six six, so they can throw over the rushing linemen and other defenders. Does that make sense? Sort of, but only at the extreme. There’s probably a height that’s too short. Like Doug Flutie, who was highly talented but only five foot nine, or arguably five ten (and people did argue about it). In the end, Flutie was good but not great. Was it his height or other factors? Did we extrapolate the right stuff on Flutie or the wrong stuff? Did we decide it was his height that kept him out of the Super Bowl when it might have been those other factors? He was only recruited by one Division I school, Boston College, not exactly a football powerhouse, and colleges are pretty good at assessing high school talent. At BC, he threw for a lot of yards but had a mediocre completion percentage—53 percent—and a weak TD-to-INT ratio of 67–54. But he won the Heisman Trophy. He was drafted by the USFL New Jersey Generals and went on to play for five NFL teams and a handful of CFL teams. A solid backup. One case does not make a statistic… or it shouldn’t.

But most of us missed Russell Wilson. Most of us ignored the fact that he had faced a lot of big, tall monsters in the ACC and the 
Big Ten and he was just plain brilliant. Somehow we, the football experts, decided he couldn’t throw over the same-size guys in the NFL. But the Seattle Seahawks thought otherwise. They looked at the other numbers and extrapolated. The rest of the world looked at his height and missed and had to watch Wilson and the Seahawks in the postseason six out of seven years, and the Super Bowl twice. Jon Gruden, who at that time was an analyst for ESPN, said if Wilson were six four or more, he likely would have been a first-round pick. To say the least, he should have been.

The 50-50 rule

If you pick a quarterback from those that rise to the top of the draft, the natural process—stats, win-loss records, blowouts, comebacks, bowl games, coaches’ assessments, scuttlebutt—will lift the best to the top almost all the time. (“Almost all the time” means on average, not every single time. That’s statistics.) Among those at the top—the first-rounders—you have about a 50 percent chance of getting one who becomes a Pro Bowler, wins divisions and championships, and might even get into a Super Bowl… and a 50 percent chance of getting either a solid backup or an outright bust. As for your chances of getting a truly great one, “elite” as people like to say—the next Manning, Rodgers, Luck, Roethlisberger, or Brady—if you get on the good side of the 50-50 rule, at least you have a shot at it. You just need three more pieces. First, a coach who clicks with the quarterback. He doesn’t have to be a great coach; he just has to have the right chemistry with the QB. If they win together, everyone will call him a great coach anyway. Second, good personnel to surround the quarterback. Great throwers need guys who can catch the ball and 
then run after the catch, and good running backs to grind out yards so every play isn’t clearly a pass. And third, a strong defense to keep the other team’s score down, so your great quarterback isn’t trying to perform miracles every Sunday.

The coach-quarterback match is also subject to the 50-50 rule. It’s not just a matter of having a good coach and a good quarterback. It’s having a good, smart coach who knows how to coach that particular quarterback, and a quarterback who responds to that kind of coach. It’s chemistry. Like dating. Smart, beautiful girl meets smart, handsome guy… and they fall in love… or they hate each other. Take these two cases: Andy Reid, acknowledged to be one of the best minds in football, drafted Donovan McNabb out of Syracuse with the number two overall pick, and was slammed by the critics and Philadelphia fans for missing Tim Couch at number one, Akili Smith at number three, and maybe Daunte Culpepper at eleven. Those three he passed up had careers in the NFL that are hardly noteworthy. Reid and McNabb, capitalizing on the quarterback’s running and scrambling, with enough passing to get by, had seven of eleven seasons with ten or more wins, and a Super Bowl appearance in 2004. Then, in the next few seasons, the same coach couldn’t quite find a match, including Michael Vick near the end of his career, and Reid was fired. Fifty percent good with McNabb, 50 percent not good with the others. Then Reid went on to Kansas City, eventually got Patrick Mahomes in the draft, and found what seems like a match made in heaven, back to the good side of 50-50.

Then there’s the case of Jeff Fisher, head coach of the Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans, who drafted Steve McNair out of Alcorn State as the third overall pick. It was a thin year, with Kerry Collins the only other first-rounder. McNair was one of those labeled—for 
good or bad—a running and passing quarterback, which Fisher saw as good, and together the Titans had four seasons of ten or more wins, and a Super Bowl appearance. The good 50 again. Then, Fisher drafted Vince Young, third overall, the sure-thing pick out of Texas. The only thing sure about Young’s career is that it was a disappointment, with six years in the league, under 60 percent completions, an upside-down TD-to-INT ratio, and too many losses. The bad 50.

Was it Fisher or McNair that worked? Was it Fisher or Young that didn’t? Was it Reid or McNabb that worked? Was it Reid or the others that didn’t? It was the marriage. I believe the stats on divorce are about the same.

Billick’s extrapolations #1: Completion percentage

Completion percentage matters in college and it matters in the pros. In a quarterback’s arsenal, there are only two offensive weapons: running and passing. Generally, passing has the potential to gain more yards on a single play. So the quarterback better be able to complete his passes most of the time. “Most” means over half the time… well over. The magic number is 60 percent and with each year it seems to go up. Look at his completions year by year in college. Which way are they going? Flat or down, regardless of TDs and wins—those are not good trends. Up, even little by little, is good. If he breaks the 60 percent barrier, that’s even better. It’s rare to see a college quarterback’s completion numbers go up in the NFL. Yes, the receivers are better in the pros. But the defenders are better, stronger, and faster; they read the quarterback’s eyes and footwork; and they’ve seen everything you can throw at them. 
They feed on picks. If a prospect completes 55 percent or fewer of his throws in college, even if he can throw the ball eighty yards like a bullet, even if he is so big it’s hard to sack him, even if he can run like a halfback, even if he’s the smartest guy on the field, if his completions are well below 60 percent, scratch him off your list. Do not, I repeat do 
not
, get deceived by his other skills. If he can throw that far and that fast, maybe he should be a major league pitcher.

Extrapolation #2: TD-to-INT ratio + percentage

The TD-to-INT ratio is important, but not in a vacuum. This one should be coupled with TD and INT 
percentages
. At first glance, it looks like the ratio stat should be a good indicator by itself. After all, it’s better to throw more touchdown passes than picks. But it’s precisely the ratio part that can throw you off. I’ll use an exaggeration to illustrate: If a conservative quarterback throws ten touchdowns all year and no interceptions, his ratio is perfect. But his team isn’t scoring much. And he may be throwing hundreds of incomplete, uncatchable passes, even if they’re not intercepted. One more shortcoming to the ratio: It counts negatively the passes that should have been caught but were bobbled by a receiver… right into the hands of a defender as INTs. And if you go by ratios only, there are flukes. In 2013, Josh McCown, the ultimate journeyman quarterback, who has been with nine different teams, put up a 13-to-1 TD-to-INT ratio for the Bears, third in the all-time rankings. An undrafted guy named Damon Huard posted an 11-to-1 ratio in 2006 for Kansas City. Both of them threw far fewer passes than the leaders, and it never happened to either of them again. Neither makes the career list of TD-to-INT ratios, led by 
Aaron Rodgers at 4.36, Russell Wilson at 3.31, and Tom Brady at 3.03. No one on the all-time list is in double digits. That happens once or twice in a career. Brady hit 14 to 1 and Rodgers posted a 12.5 to 1… once each. So, looking at only the ratio, and only at a year or even two, makes for good examples of the danger of not extrapolating.

It’s better to look at the ratio 
along
 with
 hard percentages—TD and INT percentages: How 
often
 does this guy throw touchdown passes? Let’s say it’s 5 percent or more. That’s good. Look at the historic leaders: Brady at 5.4 percent; Brees at 5.3 percent; Roethlisberger, Marino, and Montana at 5 percent. The outliers are Favre at 4.9 percent, Elway at 4 percent, Aikman at 3.4 percent. In the modern game—that is, more passing—at the top of the touchdown percentages are Aaron Rodgers and Russell Wilson, each with 6.0-plus percent of their passes going for TDs. Early in his career, Patrick Mahomes has a TD percentage of almost 7 percent. And Lamar Jackson, after a season and a half, is at 7.4 percent. It’s unlikely they can keep those numbers up, but they will definitely have to be above 5 percent to stay at the top of the game.

Think about that 5–7 percent though. Consider all of the five-, ten-, twenty-yard passes the QB throws that move the team up the field from, let’s say, the twenty-five-yard line where they started, and over 5 percent of those total passes go for six points. That’s meaningful. Now, how often does the same guy throw interceptions? In an earlier, less aerial game, quarterbacks like Staubach, Montana, and Elway could get away with higher interception rates. But today, in the pass-happy era, the pick percentage has to be low. Career-long, Aaron Rodgers (1.4 percent), Colin Kaepernick, Tom Brady, and Russell Wilson (all 1.8 percent) have the lowest 
percentage of interceptions. That is less than two passes in a hundred! That’s meaningful too. Especially with a guy whose overall completions are better than 60 percent. So far, Mahomes and Jackson are both at 1.6 percent interceptions.

When you’re sizing up a draft pick, you have to look at 
both
 the ratio and the percentages, separately and together, and then year by year, in order to extrapolate and draw your conclusion.

Extrapolation #3: Yards per attempt

This is a good indicator of both the coach’s and the quarterback’s confidence in the QB’s abilities. Can he keep drives alive with passes long enough to move the chains? His throws don’t have to be super deep but they can’t just be dump-offs to avoid a sack. They have to indicate that the quarterback is seeing the whole field, adjusting to the defense, spotting open receivers midfield or downfield. Yards per attempt doesn’t just show whether he’s a passer; it can show that he’s an aware quarterback. It reveals judgment. And yards per attempt, by definition, is an extrapolation. It isn’t a measure of longest pass, or total yards gained by passing; it’s an average of a lot of passes—short, long, and medium—to arrive at the depth of throw he can make reliably. Again, you can’t look at it without completion percentage or TDs-to-INTs, but in concert, you can start to see a picture of the future.

Extrapolation #4: Pocket presence and decision-making

These combined elements are critical, but admittedly hard to quantify and project. There’s no pocket-presence metric or percentage. 
He’s 52.56 percent effective when giant monsters are trying to kill him… When the play falls apart, he throws the ball away 14 percent of the time… His ratio of panic to cool is 1.4 to 3.5.
 Unfortunately, no such numbers exist. There’s no calm-under-fire metric. Even the definition of pocket presence varies depending on who you ask. The consensus is that pocket presence is the ability—the presence—to see and feel where the pressure is coming from, how fast, how long you have, and then adjusting your play to avoid or beat the pressure, reacting but not overreacting, and still making a play. My personal definition of pocket presence is: 
finding opportunity in the midst of chaos
. Every snap for a quarterback is a plan versus a hundred ways to wreck the plan—shifting packages, blitzes, man coverage or zone, you name it.

This is the way Joe Montana put it: “Standing in the pocket in the face of a heavy rush has been compared to auto racing, and that’s not too far off. Personally, I always thought it was more like standing in the middle of a freeway.”

Decision-making is what the quarterback does in the midst of that chaos: (1) read the defense, (2) stick to your play or call an audible, (3) see the whole field, 270 degrees, sometimes 360 if they’re coming up behind you, (4) adjust on the fly, and readjust, (5) hand off or keep or roll out, (6) find the first-read receiver(s), (7) check down to the second read, (8) throw the ball, and (9) don’t throw an interception, (10) or get sacked, and (11) somehow pick up a first down… in less than three seconds. When he can do that under the worst circumstances, that’s pocket presence. When he can’t, that’s when bad decisions are made.

So how do you evaluate pocket presence and decision-making in a quarterback prospect? Watch film of the kid in college, but 
do not
 watch only plays that go according to plan. As Kevin Stefanski, who has held almost every offensive coaching position there is at the Vikings, said not long after being named new head coach of the Browns, “Most of the game is played ‘off-schedule,’ when there’s nothing there. Then, can you make a positive play when you have no right to?” A wise observation. And he’ll need plenty of that wisdom at the Browns next year. Plenty will happen off-schedule.

So no, do 
not
 watch the sizzle reel: The kid takes the snap, drops back, gets good protection, spots his receiver cutting across the middle getting separation, hits him with a quick strike for ten yards, gains another five on the ground, and it’s first and ten at the other team’s forty. Nice but not so relevant. Find as many plays as you can that went bad. Not disastrously bad, just not picture-perfect. With a stopwatch in hand, study snaps where the defense reads the play, comes crashing through the O-line, arms waving, blitzing and mauling; the receivers are covered like blankets; the blocking backs are trampled; linebackers are hanging on the quarterback’s shoulders… then watch what happens. What did the quarterback do? Run the play over and over, with one eye on your stopwatch. Give the kid one… one and a half… two… two and a half… three seconds. Freeze the film at each second or half second. What’s he doing? Is he still looking for a play? Is he stepping up instead of stepping back, looking for opportunity instead of taking cover? If the defense is all over him, the only good news is, some receiver out there has been left uncovered. Does he see a tight end who shook free? Is he looking for a running lane? Or is he throwing the ball away? Or curling up for the sack? Or worse, throwing the ball into Pickville? Hit the play button. In the next 
second you’ll see whether the kid has pocket presence. Remember, he’s only got 2.5, maybe 3.0 seconds, at most.

Find ten or fifteen plays like that, from each year he played in college. You can’t judge by one or two plays—every quarterback gets clobbered. It’s what they do after they’ve been hit over and over that matters. It’s like Mike Tyson’s famous quote: “Everybody has a plan until they get hit in the mouth.” That’s what you’re studying. Go through each play, second by second. Assign him a number grade for every second, let’s say on a 1–10 scale, so a perfect score for one play that lasts three seconds would be thirty. Then take the total score of all the plays and divide it by the number of plays, to come up with his average score per play. A very good number would be in the mid-twenties. Low twenties could be okay. Below twenty, there’s trouble. Then compare the scores he got per year. Are they getting better, staying the same, or getting worse? The same method works for grading a rookie, but then it’s even more accurate. Now, instead of trying to figure out if a kid should be in the NFL, you’re judging a quarterback in the NFL and deciding if he belongs there, maybe even how long he’ll last.

The NFL doesn’t have a decision-making metric, nor does any major statistics source. But they have assembled some indicators of what a quarterback does, why he does it, and whether there’s a pattern emerging… 
if
 you read them as trend lines. First, there’s the list of the twenty most improbable completions; that is, the twenty toughest completed passes in the entire NFL, over the full season, who completed them, and how difficult they were—ranked from 1 to 20, with number 1 being the hardest pass to complete. It also tells us, by omission, who 
didn’t
 throw as many tough passes but may have been completing smart, good passes game after game. It reveals both talent and desperation. In another fast-forward, look at the 2019 real results: Ryan 
Tannehill threw the single most improbable completion, a 47-yard pass to A. J. Brown, but it was the outlier in an otherwise remarkably steady performance that put the Titans in the playoffs. Tannehill was nothing if not consistent, relying on midrange passes (average 9.6 yards), with a 70 percent completion rate, and the league’s most productive red zone offense (88.6 percent TD result.) On the other hand, Baker Mayfield completed the sixth most improbable pass, but unfortunately threw too many others that were equally improbable but not complete. Then there’s Russell Wilson, who threw number 2, 8, 13, 14, and 24. That tells us a lot. Russell Wilson can consistently throw and complete passes in awful circumstances. Tom Brady completed exactly one of these miracle passes, number 19 on the list, which is consistent with Brady’s reputation for wise decisions. Sam Darnold was equally conservative, with one such pass. Among our other 2018 draft quarterbacks, Josh Allen and Lamar Jackson didn’t make the list, which may well be a good thing. That’s good decision-making too.

Another insight into decision-making in the NFL data set is “completion percentage above expectation” (expectation is a number arrived at through other aggregated data). Again, looking at 2019, Ryan Tannehill was at the top, with a 70 percent completion rate, 8.1 percent higher than expected, which fits with his unexpected comeback year and his heavy reliance on the run game. Drew Brees at 74 percent was 6.3 percent better than expected as an elite quarterback who often tends to outperform expectations. Among our draft group, the ranks were: Lamar Jackson at 66.1 percent, which was .08 percent above expectation; Sam Darnold at 61.9 percent, or .03 percent above expectation; Baker Mayfield at 59.4 percent, or -3.5 percent; and Josh Allen at 58.9 percent, or -3.7 percent. Josh Rosen was not a starter in 2019 so he was not listed.

Those numbers don’t tell you exactly how the season went for a quarterback. After all, Drew Brees and the Saints didn’t survive the wild card round. But they do give a good picture of how each QB did. Jackson—good. Darnold—so-so. Mayfield—up and down with too much down. Allen—better results than the numbers show.

Since making decisions gets harder, and more telling, when plays threaten to break down, the NFL’s Next Gen Stats compiles one of the more revealing data sets—quarterback performance under pressure—whenever a pass rusher gets within two yards of the quarterback near the time of the pass. For the 2019 season the results were both instructive and predictive: Again, Tannehill and Brees top the list of getting it done when the heat is on, one for his surprise season, the other for his likely Hall of Fame career. But let’s look at our draft group in order (again, excluding Rosen for ’19): Lamar is number four, completing almost half of his passes under pressure and averaging seven-plus yards per play. Josh Allen isn’t far behind at number nine; then we drop to Mayfield at number twenty-five and Darnold at twenty-nine.

All three analyses are more than snapshots of what happened. They can be extrapolated into what is likely to happen. Russell Wilson is probably going to keep completing difficult passes. He’s that good. Conservative QBs are going to keep 
not
 throwing those balls. Desperate quarterbacks are probably going to get more desperate. Completions above expectations may reinforce success—as with Brees—and maybe offer some new guidance: Tannehill could continue to surprise; Lamar Jackson is on the rise; Darnold is a maybe; and we should worry about Mayfield and Allen. When it comes to pressure play, the same pluses hold for Tannehill and Brees, but here it looks like we’re seeing more good indicators for Jackson and 
maybe for Allen, and more concern for Mayfield and Darnold. Put the data together and there’s a decision-making pattern… if we pay attention to it. Lamar Jackson is a yes, Allen is a probable yes, Darnold and Mayfield are somewhere between maybe and no, and with Rosen not on the charts, it looks a lot like 50-50 so far.

Vision—a critical subset of pocket presence and decision-making:
 Vision is the ability to see the whole field. All at once. Fast. Fighter pilots are tested for their “vision”—that is, how much information they can process—in their near or short field of vision for instrument readings, and their far or long field in a 180-degree sweep for approaching aircraft and/or weather, and then amalgamating and processing all of the input and determining a course of action in a matter of seconds. For a quarterback it means seeing the short field—approaching defenders, blitz packages, edge rushers, and maybe an open running lane—as well as the long and wide scope—pass coverage, receiver routes or broken routes, and possible open targets… all in less than three seconds. The fighter pilot has a lot more on the line than the quarterback, but the similarity in skills is clear. If you have that ability to see more and process more and do it fast, you make better decisions. If you can’t, you get sacked, or shot out of the sky.

A study published by the National Institutes of Health on pilot performance showed very clearly that, to state what may seem like the obvious, vision matters. A team of international experts in kinesiology—the study of the mechanics of body movement—looked at the relationship between key pilot attributes, which they categorized as expertise, performance, and gaze behavior—what you look at and for how long—in detecting errors in complex cockpit tasks. They studied twenty-four pilots and, as a control, 
twenty-six non-pilots, all of whom watched videos from a pilot’s point of view, and all of whom were asked to look for malfunctions on the instrument panel. Pilots did better, substantially better, than non-pilots. Pilots actually spent less timing “staring” at the instruments, but seemed to absorb more, faster. They are superior at shifting attention from “global”—big picture—to “local”—cockpit—information. In football terms, it means the pilots could see the blitz and the pass coverage and meld both into a decision. All of which should give us some comfort next time we fly.

On the football field (and in the air), what vision translates to is anticipation, the sense not just of what is happening, but what is 
going
 to happen. All great quarterbacks have vision and anticipation. It’s a difficult quality to evaluate because it can be judged best by actual success. It’s particularly hard to spot in college quarterbacks, again because we don’t have a metric to measure how much the QB sees and how fast he processes it.

But there are attempts to teach this type of vision. IMG Academy runs a program for NFL and Major League Baseball players in “vision training protocol,” based on Air Force Academy pilot training. Some quarterbacks have used it to prepare for the Combine, some receivers to improve their anticipation skills. Can “vision” be taught or is it God-given? It’s hard to say, but measuring it, and then trying to train or refine it, can’t hurt. IMG staff are convinced they can improve the speed and results of the brain processing input, and then the quality of reaction. You often hear the phrase “the game slows down for a quarterback” after a while. Obviously the game doesn’t actually slow down, but a good quarterback begins to see things and, more importantly, interpret things more quickly, and clearly that leads to better decisions.

With regard to rookie quarterbacks, I’ve often said they can only throw what they see. If a receiver is wide open, they can usually fire the ball in with great accuracy. In college there tends to be more separation between receiver and defender, so it’s easier to spot a player who is open or is going to be open. In the NFL those margins are not as big, and a rookie quarterback may not “see” a player as open, while an accomplished, experienced quarterback can see that a receiver is open or, based on his experienced eye, is going to be open at a particular point.

Interestingly, when you’re facing a young quarterback, the instinct of the defense and the defensive coordinator is often to blitz and pressure, with the goal of making the game feel faster and more confusing to the novice. In fact, that may actually make things easier for the QB because the defense unfolds quickly and clearly: blitz package, man-for-man coverage, so that means there’s likely an open receiver. Of course, if the QB is swarmed by NFL linemen, he’s on the ground before he can process that. But if he stays on his feet, he has a chance. Sometimes the smarter way to go after the kid is to play different zone coverages so the quarterback ends up holding the ball, trying to sort out what he’s seeing—who’s covering who, shallow or deep—so he’s taking too much time and is less confident in making the throw. Vision isn’t just seeing it all; it’s processing it, not being overwhelmed by it. I remember talking with Tim Tebow at a game when he was a rookie, and he said, “Coach, I swear at times there are twelve guys out there.”

Unfortunately, unlike some other traits, there are no stats (yet) for extrapolating vision for the college prospect. If only there were… You can try to assess game footage when the quarterback is pressured and see how often he’s able to make a good play, but you’re never quite sure if it was because of his vision or other 
factors. Because the thing about vision is it does 
not
 mean moving your head left, right, and center, looking up and looking down. That’s what the kinesiology experts learned—the best pilots move their head and their eyes less but take in more, and do it faster. It’s almost the opposite of movement. It’s what you can see almost all at once, from one vantage point… like a pilot.

But when you’re looking for signs of “vision,” you can look at results—plays that went right or wrong, completions or interceptions, sacks or escapes. You can study the college plays and replays for outcomes. Even though good results won’t always indicate he has vision, enough good results may at least tell you that the quarterback doesn’t 
lack
 vision. He doesn’t process information one frame at a time—safety blitzing, offensive line leaking, tight end covered, better check down to… 
boom
, he’s eating turf. There are lots of talented athletes who have the physical skills to play at the college level, but few also have the mental complements to survive at the highest levels. That goes for every position, not just quarterback. Linebacker Ray Lewis was the greatest player I have ever seen in the ability to see-process-react. When he added experience and then anticipation to this ability, it made him the true Hall of Famer he is.

The ’18 rookies seem to cover the gamut in vision ability. The observation on Lamar Jackson is that he sees the field very well. Proof of that may be the way he describes a play after the game. He’ll identify all the players on the opposing team during a given route, by number: “22 fell a step behind and 42 was heading away, 59 came across so there was a hole, and I spotted Mark [Andrews]…” He saw them, then recorded them mentally, and he made a decision. And he even remembers them after the game. That’s vision. On the flip side, there are those who now question if 
Baker Mayfield “sees” the whole field well enough, hence too many interceptions. Josh Allen is very effective versus man coverage and also when he gets outside of the pocket, so he can “see” a specific receiver. But when he has to operate from the pocket versus zone coverage, he seems to become unsure of himself and is not confident enough to throw the ball where it needs to go. They’re all facing the same game, often the same defensive packages, but their ability to process it all and make the best choice varies widely. Vision may be teachable in a little kid. But it’s unlikely to get better in an adult. Especially an adult who’s being attacked by monsters.

My final verdict on pocket presence/decision-making is simple: It’s binary—yes or no. Extrapolate from the year-to-year trends. If the positive indications are going up, he may be a prospect. If they’re flat, be concerned. If they’re going down, you know what to do—run. For those who do make the cut, now you have to look back at what you learned in the other extrapolations. If a kid has pocket presence/decision-making and you add that to other metrics that are strong, he’s a good prospect. If his other metrics are good but he lacks pocket presence/decision-making, scratch him off the list. Do not let yourself get talked into him. I speak from experience, good and bad. No quarterback has ever found NFL defenses less pressuring, less threatening, less intimidating, shall we say kinder and gentler, than in college. Ask Tim Tebow, Johnny Manziel, Ryan Leaf… there’s not enough space for this list.

Extrapolation #5: Maturity/Leadership

Once I interviewed a kid at the Combine whose draft summary looked good on the field but who was a sea of red flags off the 
field—school discipline, misdemeanors, probation, suspensions. I asked him, with my less-than-subtle word choice, “Young man, are you a thug or just stupid?” The kid was surprised by my bluntness, took a beat, and replied, “Coach, are those my only two choices?” I had to admit, that was a pretty smart answer. He knew his record looked bad, but I got the feeling at least he was trying to find a way to get on a better path. I couldn’t bring myself to have the team take a chance on him, but he did go on to have a very good career, and very little trouble.

Maturity isn’t a luxury in a quarterback; it’s a must. He is the one guy on the team who absolutely must be reliable, steady, and wise under pressure, displaying good judgment and making good decisions on and off the field. No successful quarterback in the NFL has been immature or childish, at least not for very long. They either grow up fast or burn out fast. Think about the great ones, the Hall of Famers and future Hall of Famers: Joe Montana, Dan Marino, John Elway, Warren Moon, Brett Favre, Tom Brady, Peyton Manning, Drew Brees, Aaron Rodgers. Plenty had troubles—who doesn’t?—but all ultimately showed the sound judgment to be guys you can trust with the keys to the car. Michael Vick had a bout with stupid behavior, but he dealt with it and showed he could learn and return to the field. Same with Ben Roethlisberger.

Athletic arrogance

Some players are confident. Some are overconfident. There’s a difference. Being just plain cocky, conceited, overinflated, full of themselves, or full of other stuff comes from a kid being told that because he can throw a ball or sink a basket, he has license to get away with bad behavior. That’s not confidence. That’s being a jerk.

Then there are the guys who are confident because they have the goods. Joe Namath was assured, even brash. But not without cause and a plan. By “guaranteeing” his upstart Jets team could beat the powerhouse Colts, he replaced his own and his team’s self-doubt with self-confidence. Sixth-round draft pick and rookie Tom Brady supposedly told Patriots owner Robert Kraft that drafting him was “the best decision” the team had ever made. A boast? Maybe. But then he made good on it. As Dizzy Dean famously said, “It ain’t braggin’ if you done it.” Today Brady throws fits on the field when things go badly, but they may be the wisest, most strategic fits you’ll ever see. 
The refs are treating us badly!… We have to play harder and smarter… I threw that ball where you could catch it… I need you at your best… That guy hit me late… Get mad, get even, win the game!
 He’s not immature. He’s a motivator. Muhammad Ali used confidence—call it braggadocio—as a tactic in his career. He had fights half won before he got in the ring. I see some of those same traits of confidence in Patrick Mahomes. He doesn’t make hollow, egotistical boasts, but his natural swagger, his on-field style, and his off-the-field smile are all infectious, in a good way. His team believes, with him at the helm, they can do just about anything. And they have.

If you have the proven talent, the results, the 
trends
—not just some good stats or a few 
SportsCenter
 clips—you have what I call “athletic arrogance.” The “athletic” part means the proof—high school, college, bowl games, comebacks—and the “arrogance” part means you have the attitude—confidence, conviction, swagger, leadership—that your results have warranted. Some players achieve good results but lack the attitude to lead. Too many players lack the results but are long on the attitude. A handful have athletic arrogance.

Extrapolating maturity

Maturity may seem amorphous and hard to evaluate, harder to extrapolate than even pocket presence and decision-making, but it really isn’t. Granted, we don’t have a collection of stats put together by the NCAA on maturity like they produce for quarterback metrics. But we do have strong indicators. However, we often look at the wrong ones. Some people look at background or environment and think a kid from a good neighborhood is somehow more likely to be mature than one from a tough area. Some think a kid from a two-parent household is more solid than one raised by a single mother or aunt. Some place a value on economics—kids from middle-class homes over kids from lower incomes. Some add another wrinkle, with a prejudice against kids from affluence, believing that they’ll be spoiled and hard to discipline. Some, whether they admit it or not, look at race. I don’t have to make that case; we can just look at how many, or rather how few, African American quarterbacks we’ve had until very recently, despite the large number of players of color in other positions.

The real indicators are not economics or number of parents or race. They’re who influenced the kid and how the kid responded. Not once, but over time. Not if he got in trouble, because almost everyone does, but how he acted afterward, what he learned—if anything—how he behaved next time. Look at the patterns. Then extrapolate.

Nine-time Pro Bowler Warren Moon came from a one-parent household where he had to choose one sport to play so he had time to hold down a job to help the family get by. You think that didn’t 
build Warren’s character, humility, and determination? For sure it did. The Manning boys came from a privileged, athletically savvy family, with father Archie a renowned quarterback and New Orleans local hero. When the parents were deciding where to send their boys to grade school, they didn’t pick an athletic powerhouse, they picked an academic powerhouse. They figured if the boys had sports skills, they would show, but in the meantime, education was the highest priority. You think that didn’t help form the character of Peyton and Eli? It was absolutely central.

In the 2018 draft class, we have two highly talented young men with maturity question marks. One is from a smart, successful, affluent, Southern California family—as good a background as you could find. The family raised an uncommonly gifted golden boy who has been criticized for an attitude of entitlement and an oversize ego, who is so confident he’s been considered by some as hard to coach. So far, that knock has stuck on Josh Rosen.

The other question mark is on a kid from a family that faced financial reversals, going from prosperity to losing their home, from the heights to the depths, upheaval that could have resulted in personal reserve and modesty. Instead, this young man gained an early reputation for in-your-face gestures, crude stunts, and unwarranted boasts. Overcompensation for insecurity? I’m not enough of a psychologist to know. What I do know is that has become the MO for Baker Mayfield. With no apologies. Mayfield says, “Hey, that’s just who I am.” The critics are saying, “Yes, it looks like that is who you are.”

Then there’s a guy who was raised in a small town, on the 
third-generation family farm, weaned on homespun rural values. He looked like a model young man, all-everything, playing multiple sports, working the family farm and restaurant. But just before the NFL Draft, racially biased tweets from his high school days were revealed. Instead of denying them or shrugging them off, he owned the responsibility, saying he had been “young and dumb,” and regretted having ever done such a thing. His college teammates came to his defense. He vowed to live up to the mantle of NFL leadership. So far, Josh Allen has done that. The pattern of maturity emerged.

There’s another guy in that class, a kid who came from nothing, almost literally. His father died of a heart attack when he was eight years old, the same day his grandmother died. He and his three siblings were raised by his iron-willed mother in South Florida’s tough neighborhoods, known for breeding football players and/or kids in trouble. Lamar Jackson set out early to be a quarterback, and his mother set out to relentlessly support his single-minded goal. He watched hours and hours of game films even in high school. When high school coaches and college recruiters urged him to become a running back or wide receiver, Lamar and his mother never wavered—quarterback or nothing. When scouts wanted him to do run drills at the Combine, he didn’t waver—quarterback or nothing. Where did he get his resolve? Not from two parents but from one with an iron will, as well as the influence of an early coach who stuck with him. And from his inner grit. From age eight to twenty-one, from youth football to high school to college to the NFL. It was a trend of maturity. So far, that has served Lamar Jackson well.

Maturity doesn’t guarantee leadership, but leadership demands maturity

There are all kinds of styles and types of leadership, but every variation has one common element: maturity. You cannot lead if you aren’t solid, dependable, mentally and emotionally grown up, at peace with yourself. And no one will follow you and trust in you, if you aren’t mature. The others are counting on you to be their guide. If you do it irresponsibly, egotistically, rashly, they may follow you once or twice, but not for long. Leadership demands maturity.

But maturity is the one element we tend to make the most excuses for. We say a kid isn’t mature because he’s young. We say it will come later. 
He’s just a kid and he’ll grow out of it.
 Maybe. But probably not. Maturity tends to show itself early. It’s not age; it’s sage—the seeds of wisdom. We’ve all met fifty-year-olds who are immature and make bad decisions every day. And we’ve met ten-year-olds who have a pretty solid grip on things. Maturity is much more a result of circumstance and guidance than number of years. Those are the stats of maturity. Who influenced this kid? With what values? Did he get to practice on time, or even early? Did he stay late? Did he have trouble with the law? Or in school? What did he do after he got in trouble… to make sure it didn’t become a habit? Did his coach or teacher get him off the hook, or did he have to pay for his mistakes? How did he affect other people around him? Is he entitled or grateful? Humble or haughty? How about his maturity… from grade school through college? Extrapolate. And do not, do not, do not assume it will all get better with age. After all, his NFL career is likely to be over before he hits forty.

Extrapolations and some Do-Not-Extrapolates

Clearly, there are some indicators I didn’t include or emphasize. Yards gained passing I don’t like because there are some guys who are okay but not great quarterbacks who can sling the ball with ease and pile up big numbers and still lose ball games. The passer rating I use but am cautious about because, although it was the stat officially endorsed by the NFL to evaluate college and pro quarterbacks, it correlates passing to wins but doesn’t account for yards gained running. The most popular stat today, which I personally avoid, is ESPN’s Total Quarterback Rating (Total QBR), a complex formula that claims to factor in every quarterback action, from passes to scrambles to rushes to sacks to penalties, even adjusting for difficulty per play, all then synthesized into what they call “Expected Points Added” or EPA. The exact formula or weighting per factor is not only complex, it’s secret and ever-changing… or voodoo. According to ProFootballTalk/NBC, ForTheWin/
USAToday
, and other analysts, Total QBR has been wildly off base, including putting Ryan Fitzpatrick ahead of Tom Brady in 2015, another time ranking Brian Hoyer over Ben Roethlisberger, Matt Ryan, Philip Rivers, and Russell Wilson, and once putting Ryan Mallett over Cam Newton. Sometimes you have to just trust your eyes and the facts: the won-lost column, and postseason appearances. Brian Hoyer has never, ever been better than Ben Roethlisberger, except maybe at Scrabble. They’ve tweaked the Total QBR formula from time to time, but to say it’s flawed is to say Swiss cheese has holes in it.

Extrapolation beyond football

The need to extrapolate is hardly restricted to quarterbacks or football or sports in general. The danger of isolated data applies to every field imaginable. If you hit oil twenty times on a parcel of land, it does not guarantee the next derrick won’t come up dry. The stock market highs and lows can be tracked, but if you don’t look at trends, good luck. Extrapolation is like tracking hurricanes. It isn’t a sure thing. Plenty of hurricanes veer one way or another or just die out. But most don’t. So you look at the data—the speed, the winds, the temperatures—but if you don’t extrapolate the path, you’re just hoping for a miracle. It doesn’t mean it will follow the path you predict, but it means it’s likely, so if you live there, pack up and get out.

The sum of the parts, the data only, without extrapolation, does not add up to the whole. What I call the opposite of synergy applies, not only on the football field but in other places as well—everyplace. Business is full of CEOs with great credentials—Ivy League degrees, MBAs, highly recruited, off-the-charts IQs. Then along comes a brash big thinker who eats their lunch in the real business world. We all know the Facebook story, how the Winklevoss twins, with golden résumés, including prep school and Harvard and even the Olympics, had an idea for an online social platform, yet it took an unorthodox rule-breaker in Mark Zuckerberg to drop out of Harvard and make it a reality. But if you looked back at Zuckerberg’s trends, from his writing software in middle school to creating a network between his father’s home computer and dental office, inventing instead of just playing computer games, building a music player based on machine learning that 
was recognized by 
PC Magazine
, you’d have extrapolated that this guy was a first-rounder on the entrepreneur draft board.

Another unlikely pick by conventional credentials might have been an English art school student with no formal education in engineering who came up with the best vacuum cleaner in the world. Again, if you looked back at his design for a wheelbarrow based on a ball instead of wheels, and a boat launcher on the same principle, and even his land-sea vehicle, you might have moved James Dyson to the top of the inventor draft board. Extrapolation, whether it’s with Mark Zuckerberg, James Dyson, or Russell Wilson, can lead us to a whole that’s greater than the sum of the parts, instead of the opposite.

Extrapolation is not a guarantee; it’s a safety rail

I have arrived at my five Extrapolations. I didn’t have them early in my career. They’re not perfect. They’re a work in progress. If you think you have all the answers, you soon become a stat yourself—a casualty. So I will modify them if better indicators come along. For now, if I were going to draft a quarterback today, I would apply them rigidly, dictatorially, and tyrannically. The only edge I know over the 50-50 rule is extrapolation.

All the quarterbacks in our study of the 2018 class were picked with their team’s combination of hard information, collective experience, and, of course, gut. Did they study the data, not just for stats but for trends? Or did they talk themselves into their picks? Did they bet on their gut? Or did they extrapolate? If your gut is golden or infallible, you can go with the gut. If you’re mortal, extrapolate. Year one is over. Let’s see how they did…

