# IV

---



IV

Rookie Year Report Card: Premature but Predictive

L
amar Jackson takes the snap, drops back, looks left, looks right, rolls out, and… is sacked.
 It’s August 2, 2018, the annual NFL Hall of Fame game in Canton, Ohio, on the day the new members of the Hall are inducted. Typically, the teams selected to play each have a star about to be inducted. This year, it’s the Ravens versus the Bears. Or Ray Lewis versus Brian Urlacher, two legendary linebackers who will receive their gold jackets. It’s also the NFL debut of Lamar Jackson. With Ravens starter Joe Flacco not playing, it was a showcase for the two backups, Robert Griffin III and Jackson. While Jackson may be the Ravens’ quarterback of the future, based on performance, RG3 looked like their backup for the present, going 7 for 11 in passing at an almost 70 percent completion rate. Jackson was 4 for 10, with one TD and one interception, for a 42.9 percent completion rate. He did run for twenty-five yards but even that was over eight carries. And he was sacked three times. The Bears didn’t play many starters either, including quarterback Mitch Trubisky. In 
fact, the secret weapons of the Ravens and Bears offenses were their defenses. Final score: Baltimore 17, Chicago 16. Based on that game, you wouldn’t have overly high rookie-year hopes for Jackson. You certainly wouldn’t have predicted what actually happened.

The same might be said of the preseason. It gave us a closer look at all five of our 2018 QBs, but it didn’t give us a prognostication of how things would go in real games in the real season. In those “pretend” games, over four contests Sam Darnold displayed the most poise of our five guys. Not the most flair or excitement, but a steadiness and comfort that you hope to find in a rookie. He played three of the four games, turned in strong numbers, made good decisions, and was held out of the last game only because it was clear he was ready to be the Jets starter. Baker Mayfield showed cool command and some big-time moments, with pocket presence and some impressive throws even without the top receivers in the games. The two Joshes were up and down, Rosen with the highest highs and lowest lows playing in only two of the four games, Allen with weak moments offset by one particularly good game against the Browns and Mayfield. Lamar Jackson had two bad games and two not-bad ones, though one of those was against the really bad Dolphins. If nothing else, playing in four games meant his first NFL game was now behind him, and the more he logged, the better.

Then, for all five young kids, the OTAs, non-contact practices, X’s and O’s, pre-liminaries, pre-paratories, pre-season, pre-everything were all over. It was time for the real deal.

How did the 2018 rookie quarterbacks do?

Suffice to say, one season hardly provides enough evidence to anoint anyone “franchise,” but there’s lots to be learned about how 
well the teams guessed, who looks promising, what a team can realistically expect of a new quarterback, how opponents can prepare for these new guns, and especially what front offices can learn in looking for their next miracle in the next draft class.

In 2018, all five quarterbacks taken in the first round—Mayfield to the Browns, Darnold to the Jets, Allen to the Bills, Rosen to the Cardinals, and Jackson to the Ravens—were supposedly going to sit for some period of time behind veterans to learn. None did. In the NFL today, with owner pressure, coach pressure, fan pressure, and win pressure (and instant 24/7 social media pressure to amp up all the other pressures), that rarely happens. It didn’t this year. Instant gratification and impatience ruled. All five rookies became starters.

As for their performance, one might make the observation of my mentor and coach, Dennis Green: “
They are who we thought they were
.” What we saw in their college years largely played out in their first NFL year. What they were good at back then, they’re good at now. What were shortcomings didn’t suddenly get fixed. With the exception of Baker Mayfield, the group had very rookie-like numbers—under 60 percent completion percentages and 1:1 touchdown-to-interception ratios, or sometimes worse. With the exception of Jackson, none made the postseason.

Never forget, the worst teams get the best picks

Sometimes people forget that losing records, not winning ones, are rewarded with high picks. It’s the NFL’s attempt at maintaining parity among the teams… 
if
 those losing teams are good at making draft picks. But teams that have weak finishes almost always have weaknesses at a variety of positions, on offense and/or 
defense. They are rarely otherwise good teams just waiting for a great quarterback. So no matter how well they draft, rationally we shouldn’t expect a miracle in year one. But owners, commentators, and mostly fans do. Rationality has nothing to do with it.

One other thing: Rookie quarterbacks should come with a warning—may be hazardous to the health of coaches. When the coach and the QB aren’t in sync, when the coach has been around for too many losing seasons and then fails to turn the team around instantly, when there’s anything other than a miracle with the new first-rounder, coaches need to pack up their homes and post their résumés. It’s not fair. It’s just a fact.

Extrapolations rookie year—not the SATs, more like the PSATs

Using my “BB Extrapolations” as the measurements, here are my report cards for the rookies, with previews as to how they’ll do next season and some takeaways for others looking for leaders.

Baker Mayfield—end of the curse of the Browns?

When Baker Mayfield went onto the field for the Browns, all he had to do to become a hero in Cleveland was win a game. The Browns hadn’t won in nineteen games, not since 2016, 635 days ago. The team, as usual, didn’t make it easy for him, spotting the Jets fourteen points before Mayfield came in for Tyrod Taylor. But Baker brought them back to win the game 21–17. A win… in Cleveland… finally. (To be totally accurate, the Browns had broken their losing streak in game one of the season against Pittsburgh, as only the Browns could, with a tie and a missed overtime field goal.) But with the outright 
win, the town went wild. Fans cheered from windows and porches, and car horns blared. Bars were jammed. Beer flowed. Locked refrigerators placed around the city with the promise they would open for a win were unlocked and dispensed free Bud Light. Diehard Browns loyalists partied into the night. Celebrations like that are usually reserved for a Super Bowl win, spring break in Florida, or the running of the bulls in Spain. Mayfield was immediately anointed the next Otto Graham. 
Who?
 Most Browns fans have no idea who Graham was or weren’t even born when the Hall of Famer played from 1946 to 1955, but that’s how far you have to go back in Cleveland to find a great quarterback. Mayfield was basically declared the God of Lake Erie. He brought a W to the standings, and on 
Thursday Night Football
, for the whole country (or those who follow the Browns) to see. He officially took over as the starter, the Browns thirtieth starter since 1999, the year they came back to the NFL; that’s more than any other team—another ugly distinction.

Baker Mayfield has beaten the odds before. He was the first walk-on true freshman to start at Texas Tech, leveraging that success to transfer to Oklahoma. Then he went on to win the Heisman Trophy. And he became the overall first pick of the 2018 draft. Now come the two “buts”—one bad, one good. Bad but: He may have had the toughest challenge of all the NFL rookie QBs, because if the best picks often go to the worst teams, in this case he went to the worst team in the NFL for years, and years, and years. Good but: The combination of Mayfield’s impressive abilities and his powerful personality may make for the perfect fit, just what the team is crying out for; they were no doubt key factors in the team’s decision to draft him. The Browns were betting the second “but” would outweigh the first and Baker Mayfield could transform the culture in Cleveland, no small feat.

Coming out of the 2018 draft, I questioned two things: (1) his completion percentage—high 60s to low 70s at Oklahoma—great, but hard to match in the NFL, and (2) his emotional immaturity (negative), which was part of his passion for the game (positive), a mixed bag at best. That positive side, the passion, evidently drew GM John Dorsey to pick Mayfield at number one over Sam Darnold or Josh Allen, or even running back Saquon Barkley. The negative side may be what caused then–offensive coordinator Todd Haley, who said, “He’s not my guy,” and head coach Hue Jackson to be less enthusiastic about the number one pick. But he was Dorsey’s guy.

Mayfield—year one, graded on a rookie curve: pretty good

How did he do year one? By the numbers, he was by far the best of the rookies. He answered the skeptics loud and clear, living up to his Oklahoma stats even on the big stage of the NFL. His college TD-to-INT ratio was obscene, as in obscenely good, hard to maintain in the NFL. In college he had 131 TDs to 30 INTs—a 4-to-1 ratio, incredible even for today’s high college numbers. I knew he couldn’t match that metric in the pros but doubted if he could keep it in the pro range of 2 to 1. I have to give him great credit for doing it. Extrapolation: His 27 TDs to 14 INTs project out to 33 TDs to 17 INTs had he played a full sixteen-game schedule, virtually 2 to 1, the minimum for top-tier NFL quarterbacks. Since I like to look at the ratio along with the percentages, Mayfield threw TDs on 5.6 percent of throws versus interceptions on 2.6 percent, pretty good on the touchdowns, acceptable on the picks.

Most impressive were his three fourth-quarter comebacks and four game-winning drives. His two games against Baltimore came 
as close to a laboratory study in pocket presence as you could find. Facing the number one defense in the NFL, he did not give his ground; he kept calm and found ways to make plays while besieged by All-Pros Eric Weddle, Brandon Williams, and C. J. Mosley. He made decisions under duress, took the team into overtime, moved up the field, won 12–9. Study that game film if you want to see how a guy does when plays go bad, or what he does to keep them from going bad. Mayfield almost pulled the same thing off in the season finale, a must-win for Baltimore to make the postseason. He threw 23 of 42 for 376 yards and 3 touchdowns. But he also threw 3 interceptions. Again he was under attack, again by the league’s most intimidating defense. Down 26–24, using the clock masterfully, Mayfield coolly moved the team down the field in what appeared to be a final drive to beat the Ravens again. Every play they were coming at him; every play he stood tall in the pocket and found his receiver, or made a checkdown, or avoided a sack. All he had to do was get in field goal position. But he threw one ill-advised pass across the middle, a pass he did not have to make. And C. J. Mosley picked it off. Game over. To me, the two games comprised a graduate course in pocket presence and decision-making—what to do and what not to do. Both were case studies in playing under duress, not beauty shots or instruction videos. Ugly, tough, what-do-you-do-when-the-heat’s-on cases. Baker Mayfield did well, very well, in both. Facing the league’s best defense, he showed the ability to extend plays outside the pocket, to break down the Ravens’ secondary. He wasn’t running the ball, but rather moving around to extend the play and finding big plays down the field. One game showed his cool. The other showed his drive. And one error, maybe indicative of ego? That throw he didn’t have to make. But 
overall, pocket presence and decision-making grades: very good and good, respectively. The real proof: He broke Peyton Manning and Russell Wilson’s previous record for rookie TD passes at 27. Pretty good first year.

The coach change and the maturity thing

The one other factor we have to consider to assess Baker Mayfield is the coaching debacle. We know how important the coach-quarterback relationship is. When it works, it can be transformational. When it doesn’t work, it can be a disaster. After not being totally on board with Mayfield as the number one pick, Hue Jackson and OC Todd Haley didn’t do much to improve the rapport with their quarterback. According to insiders, the tension in the locker room was palpable. After that first win over the Ravens, the Browns lost three in a row. On October 29, Jackson was shown the door, as was Haley. Gregg Williams, defensive coordinator, took over as interim head coach, and Freddie Kitchens kept the offensive reins. A few weeks later, Jackson signed on as a sideline coach for the Bengals, and during the Browns game, Mayfield did what could only be called a “stare-down” as he walked past Jackson, confirming that they were not the best of pals. Later that game, he did what was becoming his signature celebratory crotch-grab gesture to OC Kitchens after throwing a touchdown pass, and earned a $10,000 fine and a suspension. The crotch grab goes way back with Mayfield; he did it at Oklahoma and brought it with him to the NFL, not something to build a legacy on.

Eventually, to succeed, a quarterback has to mature (ideally this comes well before he’s retired and looking after his grandchildren). 
Mayfield explained his behavior this way: “People get maturity confused with me being 100 percent comfortable in my own skin… That’s absolutely how I am. I’ve always been that way.” (Hmm, “I’ve always been a jerk” doesn’t seem like a good defense to me.) It remains to be seen if Mayfield can mature in the face of the Browns’ history, high hopes, fans prepared for disappointment, and their readiness to give up in a split second, the moment a golden QB tarnishes. Can Mayfield become their marquee quarterback? That’s a tall order for anyone, let alone a kid with an attitude, and there’s plenty of skepticism over him being able to match his college numbers.

From nothing-to-lose to high expectations

What we have to watch for in 2019 is whether, as an established quarterback with a team that now has high expectations, he can deliver. Last year he could have had the mentality of Richard Gere in the movie 
Red Corner
 when he was on trial in China and defied the judge, asking, “What will you do? Shoot me twice?” Mayfield was playing with house money. What was the worst that could happen—lose another game in Cleveland? Now that they are expected to win, we will see if he can keep up that gunslinger mentality.

At this point I would compare him to Hall of Famer Brett Favre. That’s high praise; however, it’s not necessarily a compliment. Mayfield has the flair and the similar gunslinger style that were the hallmarks of Favre, but I would point out that Favre, despite his ability to win critical playoff games, posted regular-season numbers that were often less than stellar. Career-long, he had 508 TDs to 336 INTs, a 1.5-to-1 ratio, way short of future Hall of Famers—Brees and Manning (2 to 1), Brady (3 to 1), and Rodgers (4 to 1). Early on, we noted that this 2018 draft 
class was compared to the 1983 and 2004 classes. Favre and perhaps Mayfield compare well with those guys—Marino (1.67 to 1), Elway (1.3 to 1), Eli Manning (1.5 to 1), Rivers (1.5 to 1), and Roethlisberger (1.9 to 1). Only Roethlisberger approaches the magic 2 to 1. So Mayfield could be like Favre in a good way. Or he could be like Favre, stat-wise, in a Neil Lomax, Matt Schaub, Kyle Orton way.

The Browns will do their best to surround Baker Mayfield with offensive weapons, so he doesn’t have to carry the team alone. And we can hope that he will come into 2019 a year older and a year wiser. And maybe lose the crotch grab as his signature gesture.

Sam Darnold—finally Broadway Joe’s successor?

In his first game in the NFL, Sam Darnold threw his first pass for a touchdown… by the opposing team. Twenty seconds into Darnold’s pro career, Detroit Lions cornerback Quandre Diggs picked off the throw and ran it back thirty-seven yards for a touchdown. But Darnold settled down and the Jets went on to win the game. Head coach Todd Bowles said in the postgame press conference, “I could sit here and tell you we planned that so he could get the jitters out, but we didn’t.”

That’s what winning is like. Mistakes are turned into punch lines, positive clichés gush, and all is good. Until it isn’t. Until a 1-0 start turns into a 4-12 season.

Spoiler alert

After four years as head coach, after getting a two-year extension to 2020, Todd Bowles lost his job in December of 2018. Then in 
May the Jets fired GM Mike Maccagnan—all that losing must be his fault too. Selecting Sam Darnold with the third overall pick in 2018, the Jets had bet their near-term future on him. He was the savior. That meant if the Jets didn’t win, it couldn’t be blamed on Darnold or the weak team around him. It had to be the coach and maybe the GM. (In fairness to management/ownership, Bowles was 24-40 at the Jets, with three losing seasons in a row.) But let this be yet another warning that the tenure of a head coach and the drafting of a franchise quarterback must be aligned—it’s all about the timing. If the timing is not in sync—that is, the head coach was already there and not winning, and a new quarterback arrives and they’re still not winning—the story doesn’t end well for the coach. Bowles had two losing seasons BD—Before Darnold—and another losing season AD—After Darnold. Someone has to go. And it’s not going to be the new savior. That’s the price of not winning right now! Thanks for your service, here’s the door. The season’s barely over and the team has moved on to next year, next coach, next hopes.

Harsh reality—aka the NFL

But before we look ahead, let’s take a look back at Darnold’s first year. Coming into the ’18 draft, despite concerns about his up-and-down college performance, Sam had draft experts pointing to his USC year-two stats of 64 percent completions and 57 TDs to 22 INTs, and putting him head-to-head with Mayfield as the top pick. In fact, he was the second quarterback taken. Then he promptly beat out Teddy Bridgewater and Josh McCown and was named the Jets starter before the season even began. Did he really beat them 
out or was it preordained by the belief that the new hope is always better than the old hope?

That may have been the hope, but the reality was harsh. Darnold’s 77.6 passer rating ranked 31st out of 33 quarterbacks, with only fellow rookies Josh Allen and Josh Rosen ranking worse. His completion percentage was a lowly 55.2, and his fifteen interceptions thrown had him tied for the second most in the NFL. In fairness to Sam, his numbers started to get better late in his rookie season. After missing weeks ten to thirteen with a foot injury, he bounced back to finish the season on a high note with six touchdowns to just one interception and a 99.1 passer rating in the last four games, and his seventeen passing touchdowns were the second most by any Jets rookie QB, only behind Hall of Famer Joe Namath. There was a glimmer of hope.

With Darnold, it wasn’t just the late-season statistical improvements; he also showed signs of progress by watching the game tapes. Darnold has a quick release and often would get the ball out of his hands in under 2.5 seconds. That helped the Jets rank in the top third of the league in sacks given up. But his quick release is only as good as his ability to dissect the defense and know exactly where he wants to throw the ball, based on the looks he’s given by the defense. Those four weeks he missed due to his foot injury may have given him a chance to sit back and learn from himself—to self-scout the tapes and see what defenses were doing to him and where he needed to adjust. He gave himself a tutorial in pocket presence. Darnold watched his own film carefully, second by second, play and freeze, and he saw what he was doing when the pressure was on (which was almost always), what he did wrong, too fast or too slow, the openings he may have missed, his decisions. 
And he must have processed it all in a positive way, because when he came back, he got better. That’s what separates the average guy nursing an injury from the gym-rat/tape-rat/do-or-die jock. The former waits to get better. The latter spends every day 
getting
 better.

BB Extrapolations: Obviously, not good. Late progress. Question mark for next year. Takeaway lesson: Get your coach and quarterback on the same page.

Help wanted

The season had gone badly, but not unexpectedly. The question was, What would the team do to make the following season’s story turn out differently? First, the Jets handed the keys over to new head coach Adam Gase, fresh from Miami with a history of turning quarterback hopefuls into performers.

Then the front office went on an off-season shopping spree. The Steelers’ super running back Le’Veon Bell famously sat out game after game in 2018 waiting for Pittsburgh to pay him what he and his agent thought he was worth. They never ponied up the dough and he missed the whole season. But the Jets opened the vault and signed him. And let’s not overlook what a revamped rushing attack can do to support the progression of the quarterback, especially a running back that has the receiving ability of Bell coming out of the backfield. Bell’s patience allows him to pick holes created by another off-season acquisition, one that may be just as important, offensive tackle Kelechi Osemele. Osemele gives the Jets a presence along the offensive line and a leader for that group, since he’s been one of the best at his position over the course of his career. Bell and Osemele are an obvious upgrade to a unit that ranked 26th in 
rushing yards. Here comes a guy who opens big holes and a guy who knows how to run through them. Additionally, Bell can be the outlet or checkdown pass catcher, a mismatch nightmare for the defense and a true weapon for the Jets. In his last three complete seasons (2014, 2015, 2017), Bell averaged 81 catches per season. Compare that to the 21 catches running back Isaiah Crowell had for the Jets in 2018 and you clearly see an advantage to the 2019 offense. The presence of the Osemele-Bell combo will only help take the pressure off of Darnold’s shoulders.

Then the team went receiver shopping. They landed deep-threat wide receiver Jamison Crowder from the Redskins. They figured/hoped/prayed that those pricey additions, along with the proven production of wide receiver Robby Anderson (an undrafted free agent who beat out all the veterans), could combine to translate into the growth you love to see between your franchise quarterback’s first and second years, albeit in an entirely new system. And never underestimate the adjustment to a new system. It’s either the formula that makes everything click, or it’s trying to master a foreign language that has no vowels. The Jets were figuring/hoping/praying the equation of Darnold + Bell + Crowder + Anderson + Gase and his system = winning. There was a sudden injection of confidence into the team and into Darnold himself. How much confidence?

Prior to the 2019 season, the Jets have in-house expectations of competing for a division title and a playoff spot. Darnold is quoted as saying that winning the AFC East is “absolutely realistic.” But the boost in confidence must translate to a boost in production and, most of all, wins. It can’t just be a warm feeling of self-assurance or an overdose of cockiness—
I feel good so I must be good
. It has to be the real deal. Because the Jets offense was abysmal across the board in 2018. They ranked 29th in total offense and 23rd in scoring while finishing in the bottom five in third-down conversions, turnovers, red zone production, and big plays. Those are all key offensive stats that must improve drastically if the Jets really are to have an “absolutely realistic” chance at making the playoffs in 2019.

Change in mentor

If there is a coach who can make those improvements, it’s Adam Gase. From Peyton Manning to Jay Cutler to Ryan Tannehill, Gase has shown that quarterbacks make improvements with him as either their head coach or offensive coordinator. His quarterbacks have historically added three points to their completion percentages, nearly fifteen additional passing yards per game, a better TD-to-INT ratio, and a passer rating increase of nearly ten points. Those numbers can be the difference between winning and losing. In 2015, Tannehill had a 61.9 percent completion rate, but working with Gase in 2016, it went up to 67.1, a five-point gain, and the Dolphins, for the first time in a long time, were in the playoffs. Those stats are exactly the areas that Darnold needs to improve the most—completion percentage, TD-to-INT ratio, interception percentage, and overall passer rating. All the stats that showed signs of improvement after he came off the injured list.

The added off-season talent, Darnold’s momentum, and a dose of Gase’s QB medicine have Jets fans, Jets front office, and even some in the media encouraged that Darnold really can be the franchise quarterback worth the number three overall selection.

If… if he can make the jump from year one to year two. We saw it with Jared Goff, who went from 0-7 in games he played in his rookie year to the Super Bowl the next year. We saw it with Mitch Trubisky, who had god-awful numbers in year one—a passer rating of 77.5 compared to Darnold’s 77.8—but improved enough the next year—95.4—to take the Bears to the postseason and earn himself a Pro Bowl slot. If Darnold can do likewise, he’s on his way.

Rookie-to-veteran is the most telling, difficult, and sometimes career-busting transition for a quarterback. No gentle progression; no gradual easing into it; just 
boom
—now. So it shouldn’t be surprising that it’s daunting. It’s a big step. It’s hard. And it’s scary. The same kind of thing happens in every part of life when you’re supposed to suddenly “grow up.” How tongue-tied were you the first time you asked someone for a date? How badly did you do on that first exam in college? New hires in business can’t find the bathrooms. Freshmen in Congress don’t open their mouth for fear of putting their foot in it. Even CEOs need time to find their ground, learn the competition, and watch out for internal politics. But the good ones, in every endeavor, do it. And they do it fast. Especially quarterbacks. In year one he got hit, sacked, picked off, three-and-outed; he looked up at some ugly scoreboards and got savaged by sportswriters—
He’s a bum, never should have drafted him.
 But a year later, when the three-hundred-pound linemen attack, the safeties blitz, and the pocket collapses, that quarterback can now sense what’s coming, maintain his poise, look off the covered receiver, check down to the open man, and thread a twelve-inch window forty yards away. That’s the difference between a rookie and a veteran. He’s seen it and lived it—
What else can they do to me that they didn’t do year one?
 The monsters are still trying to take 
his head off, but now he hopefully has the composure not only to survive, but to lead. That’s the difference one year can make.

Josh Allen—surprised me, in a good way

Josh Allen, the seventh overall pick by the Buffalo Bills, came out of Wyoming with eye-popping physical skills, but completions under 60 percent and a 1-to-1 TD-to-INT ratio—two worrisome omens. But second-year head coach Sean McDermott was totally on board with Allen. And the team was totally on board with McDermott. That would prove to be a critical plus.

As the season started, the Bills and McDermott showed un-NFL-like restraint and did not start Allen in the opener, instead going with fifth-round pick Nathan Peterman. It was probably one of the few examples of when the team should have started the rookie. Overmatched Peterman was blown out of the game by the Ravens, 47–3. Having shown restraint and failed miserably, the Bills put Allen into the game, way too late to do anything except show that he was now the starter.

Allen then started eleven games for the Bills where they went 5-6, completing only 52 percent of his passes and throwing 10 TDs to 12 INTs, a negative ratio—ouch, the omens came true! (In fairness, Allen’s pickoffs were second in his draft class to Josh Rosen’s, a case where finishing first is not an honor.) Allen did have one especially good game, beating the Vikings with good passing and thirty-nine yards on the ground. Allen was injured a few weeks later and missed part of the season. He came back as the starter—another team all in on their young hope—but the Bills’ fate didn’t change much and they finished at 6-10. What did we learn? The 
Bills team is not good. But we knew that. Allen may be good if/when the Bills get better. But we knew, or hoped, that too.

Allen comps—Flacco, Wentz, or someone else?

Still, Josh Allen had a more impressive season than I anticipated for him when the Bills drafted him as the seventh overall selection. While he was drawing comparisons to Joe Flacco in terms of frame and size, he hailed from the same system as Carson Wentz and was seen as a better raw athlete than Flacco. He certainly possessed the arm talent to drive the ball across the field and into tight windows with a quick and explosive release. A quick release is not to be underestimated. Think back to the pocket presence issue—the tsunami of rushers, the need to make swift, wise decisions—where the speed of release can be the difference between a completion and a busted play. Think of it the other way around. A fraction of a second extra, too elongated a release, and 
boom
, you’re on the ground looking up. In college, Josh Allen had the rare ability to throw the ball on the run, with the elite foot speed to be an impactful ball carrier when needed.

With all that said, Allen was still a “project” player from Wyoming; that is, a guy who comes into the NFL and needs to be rehabbed. I had real concerns about the higher level of competition he would face and whether his skills would translate into the NFL. Was this game going to be too big for him? It happens to some athletes who are very good but not good enough.

Problems: He wasn’t the most efficient college passer and didn’t possess the touch needed on some throws. “Touch” is another factor that we are, so far, unable to quantitatively measure, but we sure 
need to study it on the tapes. When you look at Allen’s Wyoming game footage, there were times when he could have taken off some velocity and thrown a more catchable pass for his targets. That’s touch. He could also have hit the open player on first read rather than force the ball down the field for the big play. That’s decision-making. In other words, he didn’t always just take what the defense gave him—which oftentimes can result in a high turnover rate: bad in college, disastrous in the NFL. What would happen to him at a higher level of competition? That was why I was cautious.

While the comparison to Flacco in terms of size, and the comparison to Wentz in coming from a small college program, were both reasonable, using what we learned from Josh Allen’s rookie season, a more accurate player comp—and one to hold him to moving forward—would be Cam Newton.

Allen finished his rookie year with rookie-like numbers—low completion percentage, more picks than touchdowns, and a losing record. The low completion percentage was largely because he forced the ball downfield. That also elevated his interception numbers. The issue was decision-making: mentally going through the progressions and knowing when it’s the right time to take a chance and when he can dump the football off to his first read and take an easy five-to-seven-yard completion… while being pursued in the pocket. What Allen did, which was unwise but somewhat predictable, was to attempt a lot of deep passes, more than any other QB in the NFL during the entire 2018 season—average air yards per attempt of 11.0 and total air distance per attempt of 23.9. Those numbers ranked him first in the NFL, but not in a good way. He was throwing long without a deep threat on the roster. Who was he throwing to? More desperation than smart field generaling.

But where Josh Allen was better than expected was with his legs. We expected him to be good—we knew he could run when he had to—we just didn’t know how good. We didn’t know that he could individually have an impact on the rushing attack. Allen was the first quarterback ever to rush for more than ninety-five yards in three consecutive games and was the first ever Bills quarterback to lead the team in passing yards 
and
 rushing yards. He broke the team record for most rushing yards by a quarterback in a single season with 631 and led the NFL in rushing touchdowns by a QB with eight. Who does this sound like? That’s not Joe Flacco. That’s not Carson Wentz. That’s Cam Newton.

Head to head, Newton’s rookie season was slightly more impressive than Allen’s. Cam had a 60 percent completion rate, and he finished with four more touchdowns than picks, but he did throw seventeen interceptions. Over his career, his completion percentage is just under 60 percent, having dipped to 53 percent one year, but he’s almost a perennial MVP candidate. Yeah, but everybody knows it’s Newton’s dual-threat ability that makes him so dominant, right? Take a look: Newton rushed for 44.6 yards per game over 16 games as a rookie. Allen rushed for 631 yards in 11 games for a per-game average of 57 yards. Allen had a better per-carry average at 7.1, compared to Newton’s 5.6, so Josh is more efficient as well. Going strictly by the numbers, Allen was a more dominant rushing QB than Newton was as a rookie, and Newton was named Rookie of the Year in 2011. If this is the career trajectory for Allen, that’s pretty promising.

What it shows is that when you look at numbers, you better look hard and deep. One metric, good or bad, isn’t enough. Nothing should be looked at in a vacuum. Context is everything. Allen 
had a lousy completion percentage. No two ways about it. If you stop there, you throw in the towel. And you could be wrong, big-time. He showed us he has potential, maybe to win games differently. Maybe to use his arm and his legs. Maybe to work on his mental processes and decisions. And maybe he needs to have better weapons around him. That’s for the scouts and GM to make happen next season.

Rehabbing—rebuilding the house on the existing foundation

What have the Bills done so far? A lot. They upgraded the center position with Mitch Morse in March 2019 and added a total of seven new offensive linemen in either free agency or the draft, and a lot of these new guys will be starters. The O-line is an unglamorous aspect of the game. We like to watch quarterbacks dazzle us, running backs evade tackles, and receivers juke past defenders. But the line is what makes it all possible. It’s a wall… or a sieve. Ask any quarterback who’s been sacked a lot. The Bills are building a better wall.

On the weapons front, they added a speedy receiver in John Brown from the Ravens, which will allow Allen to do something with that arm strength besides heaving and praying. In another comp with Newton (but this one not so good), Allen’s deep throws often come out flat, lacking the velocity/loft/trajectory—that is, touch—for a receiver with elite speed to run under. That timing and chemistry are what Brown and Allen will be working on in the preseason, to develop a deep-threat combination. The Bills also added Cole Beasley, a supposedly too-small, undrafted free agent, who became a surprisingly effective third wide receiver for the 
Cowboys (the guy defenses didn’t pay enough attention to), racking up over 800 yards in 2016 and almost 700 in 2018. He brings Allen a target to work with underneath, and on intermediate routes, who can break down zone coverage and has run-after-catch ability. They also signed sure-handed tight end Tyler Kroft, a mid-round draft pick who became the Bengals’ top receiver in 2016 but got injured and missed a good deal of ’17. If Kroft is fully healed, he’s an asset. And with Brown and Beasley—and an offensive line to protect him—Allen has different looks at wide receiver—speedy and elusive—instead of the bigger but clunkier style of Kelvin Benjamin. They improved their receiving corps a good deal but, candidly, not enough in my opinion.

The personnel changes could make for a significant second-year leap for Allen as a passer in terms of interceptions and passer rating. His twelve year-one interceptions could follow recent year-two jumps: Jared Goff—year one 5 TDs to 7 INTs in only seven games, year two 28 TDs to 7 INTs in a full season; Mitch Trubisky—year one 7 to 7 in twelve games, year two 24 TDs to 12 INTs in fourteen games; Carson Wentz—year one 16 TDs to 14 INTs in a full season, year two 33 TDs to 7 INTs in thirteen games. All of those guys, plus Andrew Luck, improved their passer rating by more than ten points from their first to second years, with Goff leading the way from 63.6 to 100.5. Wentz, the go-to Allen comp, having come out of a similar lower level of competition and similar offensive style, also saw a significant passer rating increase of 22.6 points, hitting 101.9 in his second year. Allen gave us glimpses of the potential to make that kind of jump in his final game of the 2018 season against the Dolphins, in which he went 17 of 26 for 224 yards, with 5 TDs—three passing and two rushing.

If the last game of 2018 is a harbinger of 2019, we could see a franchise quarterback emerge. Of the draft picks in his class, Baker Mayfield gets the limelight due to a good rookie year, but Josh Allen may have more upside. Expectations have risen beyond reason in Cleveland—playoffs and Super Bowl dreams—but in Buffalo, Allen can stay under the radar and just perform. A winning season in Buffalo would be a clear success. They’re in a tough conference, dominated by the Patriots, but that means everybody is always looking at New England, so a where-did-they-come-from threat can arise and upset the balance. And the Bills have something else—the league’s second-best total defense in 2018 and the best passing defense in total passing yards surrendered, at just 179.2 pass yards per game. With Tom Brady aging—yes, even he ages—and the Jets and Dolphins as much rebuilding projects as the Bills, or more so, the division is as open for the taking as it has been in recent memory. Next year, Allen could catapult himself into the conversation on young QBs who can carry a franchise for the next decade.

Consistency matters, especially to young quarterbacks

That’s a long way from my early cautions on him during the draft. But it’s more proof of some axioms of extrapolation: Look hard at what you can learn and project realistically, not hopefully, or hypefully. Sometimes we look at the wrong metrics. We try to measure the harder-to-quantify elements and don’t study tape enough. But we should. Year one and year two are very different. Those worst teams who pick early have a chance to build into better teams. But coaching consistency makes a difference here. The Bills stuck with Sean McDermott. McDermott and GM Brandon Beane, who came in the 
same year as McDermott, together, in sync, have been building a team around Allen’s talents. And it seems Buffalo may agree with my comparison to Cam Newton, because they brought in Ken Dorsey as quarterbacks coach, and Dorsey coached Newton at the Panthers.

Josh Rosen—I was right, but I wish I was wrong

Rosen, the Arizona Cardinals’ number ten pick, had some spectacular and promising numbers at UCLA. But in college he went through multiple coordinators and systems, and there was always grumbling about his “maturity,” which is a nice way of saying he could be volatile, egotistical, hard to coach… you name it. After Cardinals starter Sam Bradford (by the way, a number one overall pick himself) suffered two lopsided losses and was in the midst of a third, Rosen came into game three and was the starter from then on. Once again, so much for sitting behind the veteran. (
Kid, what did you learn from watching the veteran play all of 150 minutes?
) Under Rosen, the team went 3-10; he completed only 55 percent of his passes and had 11 TDs to 14 INTs, the worst record of the season. (Rosen didn’t throw the most picks; that would be Roethlisberger, but the difference is, Ben threw thirty-four touchdowns.) Were those numbers a reflection of Rosen’s immaturity, other team weaknesses, coaching problems and changes, or all of the above? Normally, I’d say year two will tell. But it turns out year two will be a whole different movie.

Fast-forward—you can’t make this stuff up

The win-now lust, the demand for instant miracles, and everyone second-guessing everyone reached a new high (or low) with 
the story that played out in Arizona. Between weeks seven and eight, coming off another loss, Cardinals offensive coordinator Mike McCoy was fired and replaced by quarterbacks coach Byron Leftwich. After only one season as Arizona head coach, Steve Wilks was also fired. Not only were both coaches casualties of the win-or-else mentality, but for Rosen, who had a merry-go-round of coaches at UCLA, it meant getting used to yet another new offensive coordinator, another head coach, and another system. Or worse. And for Rosen, it turned out to be worse.

Shortly after the end of the regular season, the Cardinals hired former Texas Tech coach Kliff Kingsbury as their new head coach. It seems that while at Texas Tech, prior to any imminent prospect of becoming an NFL coach, Kingsbury responded to a reporter’s “what if” question: 
If
, by chance, he were an NFL coach, and 
if
 he had the top draft pick, who would he take? Kingsbury’s answer was highly touted quarterback Kyler Murray coming out of Oklahoma. But “what if” turned into “what now?” A few days/hours into his new NFL job, reporters reminded Kingsbury of his wishful thinking on Murray. Now he 
was
 a head coach; now he 
did
 have a top pick. Did he still really mean what he’d said? He didn’t say yes and he didn’t say no. But on April 11, Murray visited the Cardinals camp and made quite an impression. And Rosen was worth plenty as trade bait. What might be good for Kingsbury could be bad for Rosen, or maybe good for Rosen, depending on where the wheel stopped spinning. Was Kingsbury’s infatuation with Murray the real thing or just a passing fancy (pun intended)? In the 2019 draft, on April 25, the Cardinals took Murray with the number one pick. On April 26, they traded Rosen to the Dolphins, getting two good draft picks in return. The Dolphins had come off 
a not-so-bad/not-so-good season, finishing 7-9 behind the Patriots (but then everybody finished behind the Patriots). Blame for their season was put on (a) head coach Adam Gase, so they fired him and (b) starting quarterback Ryan Tannehill (himself a first-round pick out of Texas A&M), who struggled with injuries and a weak supporting cast… so in came Rosen. Will Rosen play for Miami or sit? Yes, he’ll play, and soon. The question is really: Will Tannehill play? If so, for what team?

Number ten overall pick—what happened?

“It’s way too early to call him a bust.”
 That’s a year-one postseason quote about Josh Rosen from Brett Anderson of CBSSports.com. What’s scary about it isn’t what he said about Rosen; after all, it’s a defense, sorta. What’s scary is that anyone would even be saying or thinking the word “bust” so soon after the guy was the tenth pick in the draft. When you have to say what someone isn’t, at least not yet, all it does is raise the idea that he might be pretty soon. It means people, including Anderson, are thinking it. 
Hey, Rosen isn’t necessarily a washout. The jury is still out.
 Anderson is kind of, in a backhanded way, sticking up for Rosen but raising all kinds of doubts and second-guessing in the process. Were the experts all wrong to rank him so high before? Did he fool us? Was his career at UCLA a sham? Or were the Arizona Cardinals so bad they made Rosen look as bad as they were?

Fact: We know that the Cardinals were a bust. Fact: We know that Rosen, who went through too many coordinators at UCLA, then in Arizona, went through head coach Steve Wilks and OC Mike McCoy—fired midseason. Fact: Now, in Miami, 
Rosen will have to adjust to new head coach Brian Flores—former defensive coordinator with the Patriots—and offensive coordinator Chad O’Shea, also formerly with the Patriots (since Dolphins OC Dowell Loggains followed Adam Gase to the Jets to ignite Sam Darnold). So Rosen will go from one losing team with a weak supporting cast to another with, if this is possible, maybe a worse collection of talent. And now he’ll be competing for starting quarterback with Ryan Fitzpatrick, who replaced Ryan Tannehill, who was sent off to the Texans to replace Marcus Mariota…

Unfortunately, Josh Rosen is a poster boy for the 50-50 Quarterback Success Rule. When he was taken midway through the first round, he looked like a promising prospect for the good side of 50. Now that one season has gone by, there’s talk putting him in the bad 50. And the fact is, we don’t know. It was 50-50 then; it’s 50-50 now.

When he was drafted, the Cardinals, unlike some other teams with internal squabbles, were all in on Rosen. They traded their fifteenth pick and gave up third- and fifth-round picks to make sure they got him. He was their guy. He was going to turn the team around. But he didn’t. Or rather, they didn’t. The Cardinals started the 2018 season, started losing, and started making changes that didn’t stop until their 3-13 season ended. Uh-oh, the bad 50?

Then the team jettisoned their head coach and hired Kingsbury, who could now make good or back off of his 
if-you-were-a-head-coach-who-would-you-draft
 sports reporter answer. Kliff convinced Arizona GM Steve Keim that the guy the team had fallen in love with only last year should be dumped in favor of Kingsbury’s love, Kyler Murray. And Rosen was FedExed to Miami. That’s a 
lot of wooing and romancing and dumping and trading in a very short period of time. It shows you how fast you can fall in and out of love in the NFL.

Trying to be rational about all of this, maybe Steve Keim believes, as some people do, that the NFL is moving toward more of a college system; that is, signal callers who are more improvisers—passing outside the pocket or running when they have to—than traditional under-center drop-back passers. Maybe that’s why he went for Murray, who is like Mahomes or Deshaun Watson, or so he hopes. Maybe that’s why he hired Kingsbury. Maybe he’s right. Maybe the NFL is changing. Or maybe not. Maybe some of these young quarterbacks can just play good football, in the pocket or out of it. In any case, Rosen didn’t fit.

Now what for Rosen?

Will he fit in Miami? First he has to compete with Ryan Fitzpatrick. We all know what’s going to happen. “Fitzmagic” will look good for a game or two, maybe three. Then things will fall apart, especially with the thin talent there, and Rosen will be sent in. The talent will still be thin, but now Rosen will really be tested. Remember, this is a guy whose biggest knock was his personal style, or immaturity, or egotism, or whatever you call it when people have to “explain” him. So much so that guys who like him sound like they’re apologizing for him. Cardinals teammate Larry Fitzgerald said, “He’s extremely confident and not in a bad way.” What do you mean, “not in a bad way”? That means people assume he’s cocky, not confident; self-important, not self-assured. Even the compliments he gets come with “buts.” Before the draft, one GM said, “He’s the 
most talented passer I have seen. He’s not the toughest…” Players respond to his “skill set, not his personality.” Does that mean they can see he has ability but they just don’t like him? Another described him as “extremely intelligent… but lacked the work ethic, will be the last one in, first to leave.” With friends like that… Charley Casserly, former NFL GM, advised Rosen, “When you go to your new team, you find out what time the janitor comes in. Then you come in and open the place up.”

I have to give the Dolphins credit for doing their homework and digging deep. They did their own checking on Rosen’s character, style, and work ethic, way past the usual headlines and scuttlebutt. A year earlier, when Miami had been toying with drafting him, they sent a scout out to the West Coast to talk to tennis coach Steve Whitehead, who worked with Rosen when he was a twelve-year-old top-ranked tennis player. Whitehead not only liked his talent, he liked the person, even as a youngster, the combination of skills and drive and competitiveness. Whitehead says Josh pushed himself to learn shots that seemed to be beyond his adolescent abilities, and then mastered those shots. He practiced relentlessly. Whitehead said, “He’s a fighter.” And people, including his tennis teammates, liked him. All the characteristics you’d look for in a future leader. Even though Dolphins then-coach Gase didn’t want Rosen in 2018, when the opportunity came up a year later to trade for him, the Miami brass felt confident they knew the real Josh Rosen and what he was made of.

So is Josh Rosen a lost cause? No. He’s just off to an awful start. Does extrapolation apply when things go bad? Yes, it can. The talents that pushed him to the top of the draft chatter didn’t disappear. He still has a great arm, excellent mechanics, the right body 
and stature for a quarterback. He still knows how to win. In his opening game, Cardinals vs. Seahawks, he coolly threw a fourth-quarter game-tying touchdown, only to lose by a field goal. In his second NFL game, he led his team to a big win over the 49ers, including a 75-yard pass for a touchdown to fellow rookie Christian Kirk. Then, down 15–3 in the fourth quarter, he led a late-game comeback to beat the 49ers again in week eight. And he took the Cardinals to an unlikely upset over the Packers, which may have been the last straw in Mike McCarthy’s tenure in Green Bay.

You don’t give up after one dismal season. You look at what went right and try to create more opportunities for that to happen. Josh Rosen needs time. Time to adjust to play at the pro level. Time to play for a team that believes in him. Time for that team to get better players around him. Time to get used to his coordinators and not see them whizzing past him in a revolving door. The NFL doesn’t give you much time. But on those occasions when they do, it can work. Witness Jared Goff, who had a really awful first year with the Rams, 0-7 in games he started. That is zero wins. So was he suddenly 
not
 the guy they drafted number one overall in 2016? Was his talent a myth? Or… was he playing for a weak team, going through an initiation by fire in his first year in the National Football League? The Rams’ front office believed in him, even if they did replace the head coach. The next year head coach Sean McVay also believed in Goff, worked with him, and built talent around him. The team went to the playoffs and Goff went to the Pro Bowl. The following year, 2018, without a change in coaching personnel, with more weapons added to the team, with continued time invested in the coach and the quarterback, the Rams went to the Super Bowl. Will Rosen get the time? Will the Miami Dolphins believe in 
him and see the leadership potential to stick with him? Will they give their coaches and quarterback time to get to know each other and learn to work together? Common sense says they should. History says no. Right now, I’d say it’s 50-50.

Lamar Jackson—the biggest surprise of all

While the top four quarterbacks were taken pretty much as expected, there was some quiet maneuvering going on as the draft picks ticked off. The Ravens had kept their eye on Lamar Jackson from the beginning. They were undaunted by the he’s-a-running-back-more-than-a-quarterback chatter. But they didn’t tip their hand with their first pick, number twenty-five, which they used on South Carolina tight end Hayden Hurst. Then they watched other teams that had made quarterback noises, like the Steelers and the Jaguars, decide instead to fill other positions. So Ravens GM Ozzie Newsome and GM-in-the-wings Eric DeCosta did one of the things they do best, horse-trade for draft positions. Ozzie spoke to his counterparts at the Eagles and made an offer for their number thirty-two pick. Whatever he offered, the Eagles wanted more. Ozzie said, “Sorry, that’s our best offer.” The clock was ticking. More picks came off the board. The phone rang and DeCosta said, “That’ll be Philly.” Ozzie’s poker playing paid off; the Eagles took his offer, and the Ravens grabbed the final pick of the first round.

Remember that in pre-draft conversations, head coach John Harbaugh vowed that if the team took Jackson, “… we’ll build an offense around him.” What that meant was, we won’t force-fit him into a traditional scheme like we’ve run with Joe Flacco, 
a classic pocket-passer scheme. We’ll make the most of Jackson’s multiple talents. That was a green light to scrap and revamp all the entrenched thinking, all the routes, all the formations, and all the play calling for the talents—not yet proven in the NFL—of one guy. Translation: We’ll stick with Joe Flacco and the old way of doing things… until it doesn’t work. Then we’re all in on Lamar Jackson and a new kind of football.

You should not underestimate what that decision signifies in the NFL. Coaches, especially coaches who have experienced a good deal of success like Super Bowl winner John Harbaugh, don’t change their ways of doing things very often or very easily.

That reluctance to change goes a long way in explaining why every December there’s a purge of NFL coaches. It’s become as much a tradition as decorating the Christmas tree. By the end of 2017, five head coaches were sacked—Ben McAdoo/Giants, Jack Del Rio/Raiders, Chuck Pagano/Colts, Jim Caldwell/Lions, John Fox/Bears—and one retired (but threatened to come back), Bruce Arians/Cardinals. John Fox took the Carolina Panthers and the Denver Broncos to the Super Bowl and was fired by each team when their records went south. As offensive coordinator, Adam Gase helped John Fox take the Broncos to the Super Bowl, then went to Miami and took the Dolphins to the postseason for the first time in eight years. Two losing seasons later, Miami cut him loose, though the Jets then grabbed him. Chuck Pagano took the Colts to the playoffs for three consecutive seasons but was let go after a couple of losing seasons. Bruce Arians was a two-time coach of the year, led the Cardinals to their best records in years, made the playoffs for two years running, then hit a patch of losses and, though technically his choice, was out of a job by the end of 2017.

In the case of Harbaugh, fresh in his memory was that despite numerous trips to the postseason, after a dry spell team owner Steve Bisciotti had at least temporarily entertained letting his head coach go (NFL—Not For Long). At the last minute, Bisciotti decided to give Harbaugh another year. When owners get that itch, it’s hard for them not to scratch it. Déjà vu to yours truly, who won a Super Bowl, then couldn’t find a franchise quarterback, and became a December casualty. Maybe Harbaugh’s near exit was the impetus for him to embrace a real change in the team’s approach.

Instant adjustment

As it turns out, it was a good thing that John Harbaugh was open to a new approach. Joe Flacco hit trouble sooner than expected. After a pretty good start at 4-2, the team lost three in a row, and in the last of those, against Pittsburgh, Flacco sustained a hip injury.

Suddenly, in his rookie year, Lamar Jackson was the starting quarterback of a team with a 4-5 record and with an offense built for a classic pocket passer. In the seven days between games, the team did their best to adjust on the fly. Against the Bengals, who had beaten the Ravens earlier in the season, Jackson ran for 117 yards, the team record for a quarterback, completed 13 out of 19 passes, and Baltimore won 24–21. The next week, he led them over the Raiders 34–17. Then they beat the Falcons 26–16. The next game they lost to the red-hot Chiefs (led by scrambler-passer-runner Patrick Mahomes), but Lamar connected on two touchdown passes. The Ravens came back a week later and upset the Chargers 22–10, with Jackson passing for over 200 yards. Then they took on the Browns, against another 2018 first-round quarterback, Baker 
Mayfield. Jackson passed for 179 yards, ran for 95 yards, including 2 touchdown runs of his own, and thanks to an incredible defensive effort, came away with a 26–24 win and iced the AFC North Championship. The Ravens were back in the postseason. At twenty-one, Lamar Jackson was the youngest quarterback ever to start in the postseason when they took on the Chargers in the wild card game. By then, the Chargers had studied Jackson and figured out how to better contain him, but his passing almost brought the team back from a twenty-point hole. The Ravens lost 23–17.

Still, a very impressive rookie record. Jackson went on a 6-1 run, and run is the right word. Relying heavily on his remarkable, elusive, defense-baffling rushing abilities, he took the team from 4-5 to 10-6 and the playoffs. Late in the season, when Flacco got healthy again, the team stuck with Jackson. He threw for 1,201 yards, 6 touchdowns, and outran all other quarterbacks—152 yards in one game—with 695 yards for the season, 5 TD runs of his own, and two games with over 200 yards passing and over 100 yards rushing. Yes, there were glitches and worries. His completions were under 60 percent, though his ratio was pretty good at 6 TDs to 3 INTs. But there were too many bad throws and near interceptions, too many fumbles, and maybe too much reliance on his legs. Lamar runs, which is great. But Lamar runs, which is scary. The conventional wisdom is that running quarterbacks tend to get hurt.

Lamar extrapolations

Can we build a mathematical model from Jackson’s seven-game rookie year? If so, his rushing numbers for next season would be eye-popping: 336 carries for 1,589 yards. (By comparison, Ezekiel 
Elliott, world-class running back, ran 304 times for 1,434 yards.) I can’t buy the straight math projection, but factoring in some realities—more plays designed for his style, dialing down dangerous runs, improving pass accuracy, and assuming he stays healthy—my extrapolations are still staggering: pass completion rate of 60 percent or 240 of 400 passes, 2,800 yards, with 14 TDs to 7 INTs; rushing with 240 carries (15 per game average) for 1,135 yards.

For 2019, the questions will be: (1) Can Jackson really become a passing 
and
 running quarterback, not a running quarterback who passes when he has to? (2) Can GM DeCosta, John Harbaugh, and his coaches really construct a team around Jackson and his unique skill set? And (3) is he just a guy who had a very good (half) season, or is he a unicorn—a guy who is a true double threat every time he has the ball in his hands—a game-changer?

In case there was anyone who needed added reinforcement to be open to change, they got it in the annual December coach purge. By the end of the 2018 season, seven head coaches were shown the door—Todd Bowles/Jets, Vance Joseph/Broncos, Dirk Koetter/Buccaneers, Adam Gase/Dolphins, Steve Wilks/Cardinals, Marvin Lewis/Bengals, plus Mike McCarthy/Packers and Hue Jackson/Browns (and his OC Todd Haley), who were ushered out midseason. John Harbaugh was not on the list. He embraced the change. The final proof: The team traded a now-healthy Joe Flacco to the Broncos.

Building around that unicorn

If… if… if
 Lamar is what he could be—the one-of-a-kind talent, the unicorn—then there’s a lot of work to be done. In the 
off-season, it would now be DeCosta’s job to find wide receiver talent, add more running power to take the focus off of Jackson, and beef up the defense (having lost Eric Weddle and Terrell Suggs to free agency). Meanwhile, Harbaugh replaced offensive coordinator Marty Mornhinweg with Greg Roman, who had been at the Ravens in 2006–7 and had come back in 2017. Interesting note: Between his two Ravens stints, he worked as OC for John Harbaugh’s brother Jim, first at Stanford and then at the 49ers. In San Francisco, Roman helped coach another mobile QB, Colin Kaepernick, to a Super Bowl, one that they lost to—small world—the Ravens. The point is, Greg knows how to develop the passer in a quarterback who has legs. And DeCosta knows how to draft and trade. In the 2019 draft, the Ravens used their number twenty-five pick for Marquise “Hollywood” Brown, a lightning-fast wide receiver from Oklahoma, now paired with last year’s tight end picks, Hayden Hurst and Mark Andrews, and 2015’s Nick Boyle. They then signed free-agent Pro Bowlers safety Earl Thomas III from the Seahawks and running back Mark Ingram from the Saints. The Ravens filled a critical hole at safety on defense, and on offense, they were doing as promised, assembling a team around their new quarterback. The addition of the offensive weapons at tight end and wide receiver, and a productive running back, take the focus off of Jackson’s run threat. Now he’s not the only guy in the backfield who might take off with the ball. Lamar might give the ball to a running back, or fake to the running back and keep it, or start to run and then throw, or fake the throw and then run…

There’s a lot of talk that we are in a new era, a new style and prototype for NFL quarterbacks. The Ravens and Lamar Jackson could be the laboratory test of that hypothesis.

