# V

---



V

Year Two: The Real World

R
ookie year is a glimpse of what your quarterback 
could
 be. Year two tells you what he 
is.
 Our 2018 rookies are no longer rookies. Now they’re second-year NFL quarterbacks, which means we now expect them to play at the highest level of football there is, consistently, no excuses, week after week, and of course, bring their teams and fans and critics a playoff spot if not a Super Bowl. You don’t get paid the big bucks for nothing.

In the off-season, each team had time, and as much money as they could muster under the salary cap rules, to tailor the team to fit their first-round quarterback—draft picks, free-agency players, new coaches for old, new schemes, new hopes.

So how did our top five do? Overall, Dennis Green’s old observation, “They are who we thought they were,” held true, but maybe not in the order we expected. Five first-rounders shook out to two to three promising quarterbacks and two to three who are struggling—one maybe on the exit bubble. Call it two and a half 
on each side of “promising QBs” and we’re at the 50-50 rule. Statistically. But there is a major aberration in the projected outcome: The top pick of the five is performing at a questionable level, and the last pick set the league on fire. Why? How? Bad extrapolation? No extrapolation? We’ll see.

Baker Mayfield—hot rookie, cold sophomore

In 2019, Baker Mayfield was all over television, on Fox Sports, on ESPN, on NFL RedZone, on Sunday afternoons, on Monday and Thursday nights… in commercials. In NFL highlight reels, not so much.

Mayfield had an impressive first year in which he hit a 63-plus percent completion mark, had 486 throws for 3,725 yards, and a 27–14 TD-to-INT ratio. He quarterbacked fourteen games, starting thirteen of them, so if you extrapolate that to a full sixteen-game season, it means 598 attempts with 382 completions for 4,585 yards and a 33–17 TD-to-INT ratio. Truly impressive numbers. In year one, the team record was 7-8-1 overall—7-7 with Baker under center—and 5-2 in his last seven games of the season. With some impressive performances even in losses, plus adding off-season talent, that would look to translate into a winning season in 2019. For a team that hasn’t had a record in the plus column in years, that showed real promise. In fact, there was talk that the Cleveland Browns were the favorites to win the AFC North division. Not just sneak into the postseason as a wild card, but win it! Wow, that’s a miracle in Cleveland akin to Lake Erie becoming the new Riviera. They haven’t been in the playoffs since 2002, and haven’t won a division title since 1989.

But the experts were gushing about the Browns and the future.

There is no doubt that the NFL’s “it” team in 2019 is the Browns.

ESPN’s NFL Insider Dan Graziano

Browns are headed to the playoffs and four more bold predictions for Cleveland’s 2019 season.

CBS Sports online

Three writers for 
Athlon Sports
 had the Browns’ season record at 11-5, 11-5, and 10-6.

SportsLine had them at 9.2 wins, enough to take the division. Bleacher Report had them at 10-6.

And the Las Vegas betting line had the Browns as +$140 favorites to win their division—that means a $100 bet gets you $140. By comparison, BetOnline had the Ravens’ over/under at eight wins, finishing third in the AFC North, with the Browns on top at nine wins and the Steelers in between at 8.5. Spoiler alert: The oddsmakers were wrong. Real wrong.

How did Mayfield’s real numbers stack up against the preseason extrapolations? In spite of a major import of receiving talent, his completion percentage was 59.4 on 534 throws for 3,827 yards (only a handful more than he threw in a fourteen-game rookie year), and worst of all, he had a 22–21 TD-to-INT ratio. And it’s not as if he made up for it on the ground. Mayfield is not a runner and he showed it, gaining only 141 rushing yards for the season. (By contrast—unfair contrast, admittedly—Lamar Jackson ran for more than that in one game.) To make matters a little 
worse, Baker Mayfield had six fumbles, though he lost only two of them.

Okay, we know what happened. But more importantly, why? High expectations. Very high. In his first year, Mayfield could, in his own words, “just be me.” He was walking into a team that had nothing to lose. You might say they’d already lost all they could. He could throw the ball up and see what happened, no consequences. If your team is expected to lose and you win, it’s not just a W, it’s a celebration. Seven W’s and the whole world opens up. But it opens up with pressure, only increased by the sports headlines and predictions that were made. How would the number one overall draft pick handle that pressure? Would he show the maturity needed to steer through a heady atmosphere? Would he click with his new coach? Would he connect with his new receivers? Would he lead when the heat was on?

Game one, unfortunately, was a preview of coming attractions, or rather, distractions. It began with a 1 TD to 3 INTs performance, at home against Tennessee in a 43–13 loss. After the Titans game, Mayfield told the media, “Everybody’s going to throw us in the trash, and I think that’s good… We don’t really give a damn what’s going on on the outside.” Brash? Maybe. Angry and petulant? Yeah, that too. Not exactly mature, but that’s to be expected now and then, especially when you start with disappointment. No big deal. It all depends on how the rest of the season goes.

First there was déjà disappointment against the Seahawks. Mayfield had a virtual rerun of the opening game, this time with a 1–3 TD-to-INT ratio, completions below 60 percent, and a 32–28 loss. Fast-forward to the last game of the season, against Cincinnati. Baker threw for three touchdowns but also had three picks. 
He completed a paltry 44 percent and, needless to say, lost the game, 33–23. This, let me repeat, was against the Bengals, a team that had a 2 and 14 record. You shouldn’t lose to the Bengals.

Did he have a good game during the 2019 season? For sure. And it was early in the season—game four—when it could have, should have, made a big difference. Mayfield and the Browns went into Baltimore and on the Ravens’ home field came away with a 40–25 win. He threw the ball only thirty times, but for 342 yards, with one touchdown and one interception. The Browns ran for 193 yards—Nick Chubb racked up 165 yards—and the offense edged out the Ravens in time of possession, which turned out to be a rarity against Baltimore. The win took Cleveland to 2-2, which turned out to be their best standing of the year.

From there on, things seemed to unravel. And the more they unraveled, the more we saw of the Baker Mayfield we were afraid we’d see, way back in the pre-draft days. His immaturity exhibited itself several times, the worst of them being when he blasted the Browns medical staff over wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr.’s sports hernia injury. Mayfield told reporters, “It wasn’t handled the right way in our training room” and said that the injury “wasn’t addressed early enough.” Suddenly, Baker Mayfield was a sports medicine expert. Didn’t anybody tell him he needs the medical people on his side? He at least tried some damage control afterward, tweeting, “My intentions were not to throw our medical staff under the bus. No I don’t know all the facts about Odell’s injury. It was emotionally answered because I can sense his [Odell’s] frustration and I care about my team and putting us in the best position to win.”

That incident wasn’t isolated though. After the Browns’ loss to 
the Patriots, when Cleveland reporter Tony Grossi asked Mayfield about a drive that fell short, Baker started to answer, and Grossi added a follow-up: “But…” he began. And Baker snapped. “Stop saying ‘but.’ I just told you the clock was running and we had a penalty. You want to give them the ball back? No. You don’t play, you don’t know. That’s just plain and simple.” Grossi said, “Were you happy with that drive?” And Baker really blew. “Was I happy with the drive? No, we didn’t score points. That’s the dumbest question you could ask. What? Jesus, Tony.” Reporters can get on any player’s nerves. They ask difficult, sometimes aggravating questions. But that’s what they do. And without them, fewer fans watch and cheer and buy tickets. So you have to face reality and answer aggravating questions. Paste a smile on your face and offer sports cliché answers. 
It was a tough loss… We’ll just have to work on execution… We know what we have to do… No excuses, it’s a team game… Blah-blah-blah.
 Talking to the media is part of your job. Unless you’re Bill Belichick and you can grunt, nod your head, and let people remember all the rings you’ve won.

I like to say, “Go back to the film when evaluating a player.” Well, players might do well to go to the film to watch Tom Brady, Aaron Rodgers, Drew Brees, Peyton Manning facing the media, not after wins but after losses. Imagine how many times they’ve been asked dopey questions. 
Tom, how does it feel to lose to a team with such a poor record?… Peyton, what went wrong today?… Drew, when the final drive fell short, what happened?
 Watch the responses. You can almost see the thought process: 
Hmm, that was a stupid question.
 Pause. Bite your bottom lip. And then break the play down, the play the reporter already knows, the play the world can watch on TV tonight or on video over and over for the next 
week. Walk through the play, step by step, from drop back to blitz to scramble to throw to interception, what the reporter already knows, but showing that you, the quarterback, knew exactly what was happening even as the world was caving in. Or if you don’t want to relive the pain, second by second, just shake your head. Look down. Breathe hard. Get very serious. Look up and say, “Guys, I have no excuse. It falls on me…” But don’t, don’t, don’t blame the reporter for your shitty game.

One other thing: officiating. You’re not the first or only guy to feel like some bad calls hurt your team on a given day. The truth is, a bad call can mean the difference between winning and losing. But here are some realities. Yes, the refs sometimes call penalties on your team or miss penalty calls on the other team that they shouldn’t and that really really hurt your team—defensive holding or pass interference. But they also sometimes miss penalties on your team that help you—holding, offsides, offensive pass interference, pushing off. They’re human. Sometimes they’re good and sometimes they’re bad. And sometimes they need to be criticized and sent back for more training… by the league, not by a losing quarterback. Don’t, don’t, don’t ever blame a game on the refs.

But after a four-point loss to the Seahawks, that’s what Baker Mayfield did. He put the onus on the officials and it was—there’s no other word for it—dumb. It was not worthy of an NFL quarterback. It’s not leadership. It’s whining. You have to take the heat and accountability yourself. Even if and when the refs are dead wrong. It should come as no surprise that Mayfield was fined $12,500 for his rant. And an expert on not living up to NFL expectations, Ryan Leaf, called Mayfield out on the bad behavior in a radio interview.

In fairness, Mayfield did show the right response to one incident. 
His teammate Myles Garrett got in a fight with Pittsburgh quarterback Mason Rudolph at the end of the Browns-Steelers game. Garrett had tackled Rudolph; Rudolph got hot and pulled at Garrett’s helmet; Garrett retaliated by ripping Rudolph’s helmet off and using it to bang the quarterback in the head. By the way, the clock had run out and the Browns had won the game. So no, there was nothing on the line, no emotional explanation, nothing. After the game, Mayfield was blunt: “It’s inexcusable. I don’t care, rivalry or not, we can’t do that… The reality is he is going to get suspended. We don’t know how long and that hurts our team. It’s inexcusable.” The league agreed. Myles Garrett was suspended for the rest of the season, the longest suspension for on-field behavior ever. If only Mayfield showed that kind of leadership and wisdom consistently. If only that was his pattern.

There was one other vulnerable spot for Mayfield. He had capitalized on his rookie-year promise by doing a lot of big-time network television commercials. Six ads for Progressive Insurance. Another for Hulu. Another for Nissan. He was all over TV with his spots. Meantime, he was having a disappointing year. So he was an easy target for the critics. At one point in the season, he was called out for having more ads than touchdown passes. It was the combination of being a pitchman and not pitching the ball very well. If you can do both, you won’t find many critics. Peyton Manning, Tom Brady, and Aaron Rodgers have had equal if not greater off-field activities.

But there’s a good lesson in Tom Brady’s very wise decision when offered one of his first commercials, an offer that came well 
after
 he was named Super Bowl MVP in 2003. He was an established star, not a guy who might become a star. Visa, the credit 
card company, approached Tom and his agent with an opportunity for a national commercial, with high exposure and no doubt a lucrative payday, an ad about the security and protection that Visa provides its cardholders. Brady said yes, but with a condition that the ad include his offensive linemen. As the ad agency shaped the final spot, the linemen would be the “metaphors” for security and protection, just like they are for their star quarterback. The ad was a hit. It was clever and fun—good marketing. But the best marketing was Tom’s approach. 
I want to share the spotlight
—the sign of a brilliant leader. He needed those guys around him more than he needed his face on TV or another paycheck. It’s no surprise that Tom also became known for not demanding the biggest contracts in the game so that the team’s salary cap had room for the guys he needed on the team. Some people have calculated he left as much as $60 million on the table in order to have the talent that would keep the team winning. You could say it’s selfless. Or you could say it’s the ultimate form of selfish, increasing your chances of long-term success instead of going for a short-term score.

It’s worth noting that Patrick Mahomes held back until after a great season—an MVP season, not just a promising one—to join Rodgers in those State Farm ads. Somebody gave him good advice. Or he has good instincts. All of these guys have cashed in on their fame, but they all produced on the field on a consistent basis. Mayfield may have found his teammates and fans and the sports media less understanding of his high profile, given the scores at the end of each game.

After the season, after another losing record—this one worse than the season before—first-year and first-time head coach 
Freddie Kitchens was, not surprisingly, fired, and GM Dorsey, surprisingly, departed too. The Browns hired Kevin Stefanski, offensive coordinator of the Vikings, as their new head coach. It’s interesting to note that Stefanski had only one year as play caller in the NFL, and he had a lot of help from Gary Kubiak, whose résumé reads like a professor of offense (backup to John Elway, quarterback coach, offensive coordinator, and Super Bowl–winning head coach), brought in to work with Vikings quarterback Kirk Cousins. Did the Browns spot head-coaching talent early? Was there enough evidence to extrapolate? Can Stefanski do what Kitchens couldn’t? Can new GM Andrew Berry do better than John Dorsey? Well, the first thing Berry did after getting the job was to give a full-throated endorsement to Baker Mayfield. No qualifiers. No ifs. No we’ll-sees. ESPN talking head Stephen A. Smith, among others, went ballistic. He addressed Mayfield directly: “You don’t deserve support. You deserve scrutiny. You threw twenty-two touchdowns, twenty-one interceptions.” And his earlier quip that Mayfield had more commercials than wins was only a slight exaggeration.

So, what went wrong with Baker Mayfield? Should he not have been the number one overall pick? Were the experts all fooled? Were we blinded by his stats, and did we miss the bigger picture? Or is he a work in progress? Did we extrapolate or did we exaggerate and fabricate what we wanted to see? Yes and no. Yes, his stats were that good and they cannot be ignored. But there were two metrics that did not get studied enough, the hardest ones to evaluate but perhaps the most important: maturity and the leadership (or lack thereof) that results from it. Remember, everything should take you back to the footage—film, tapes, records, previous patterns of behavior. Frame by frame. Incident by incident. You 
can extrapolate from that behavior and see if the trend is going the right way, stalling where it is, or even trending down.

Temperamental/stupid/egotistical responses alone are not eliminators. Consistent temperamental/stupid/egotistical responses are, especially when coupled with bad performance. What is worrisome is that Baker Mayfield doesn’t seem to be learning from experience, from repeated moments and challenges. Instead, we’re seeing behavior Mayfield showed in college, maybe even as a high schooler. Back then, a lot of it was written off as immaturity or cockiness or blowing off steam, having fun. Maybe. Maybe if he did a crotch-grab at the Kansas game; 
or
 if he planted the Oklahoma flag on the Ohio Stadium turf; 
or
 if he taunted Baylor, “You forgot who Daddy is. I’m going to have to spank you today”; 
or
 if he got drunk in Fayetteville, Arkansas, got tackled and arrested by a police officer… If he’d done just one of those things or even two, if he’d done them as a freshman or sophomore, or if he didn’t seem to brag about what he’d done, then maybe we could chalk it up to his brash nature and say he’s got spunk. But when it keeps happening, it’s not spunk. When, two years into his pro career, he’s still doing battle with the media—a battle he’s not going to win—it’s not a fluke. It’s a pattern, a bad pattern. It’s why, before the 2018 draft, scouts were divided between fawning over Mayfield’s skills and worrying about his character: At the Senior Bowl, one unnamed scout said, “Baker has a pattern of disrespect.” A pattern again. Uh-oh. Wait, it gets worse. The scout added, “Off the field, he’s Johnny Manziel.” If that isn’t a neon warning sign, nothing is. Manziel also won the Heisman, also got drafted by Cleveland, but he lasted two seasons and disappeared from football. We didn’t extrapolate on Manziel, and though I’m not saying he’s Manziel, it appears we didn’t on 
Mayfield either. Some saw it, the mixed signals of petulance and performance, but the rest didn’t want to see it.

But we can’t put all of the blame on Baker. We can put a lot of it on first-year head coach Freddie Kitchens, the former offensive coordinator and former Alabama quarterback, who took over the season after Hue Jackson. Being as charitable as I can be, and empathizing as a head coach and play caller myself, I just haven’t seen a worse run of plays called in the NFL in a long time. Not one or two or three, but a string of them. It’s hard to pick the highlights, or lowlights. But in game three, in late September, well before the Browns imploded, Freddie gave us a preview of calls to come. The Browns had the ball on the Rams’ twenty-eight-yard line on fourth and nine. Freddie called a draw play. True, they were not in automatic field goal range for their young kicker. True, they were too close to punt. But a draw play? With a quarterback with a good arm and receivers like Odell Beckham and Jarvis Landry? Mayfield gave the ball to Nick Chubb and got clobbered. It was a gift to the Rams defense. Mayfield didn’t point to Kitchens. But Kitchens owned up to it. Rightly so. But worse, he didn’t seem to learn from it. After a number of bad goal-line calls, some unexplainable timeouts and challenges, and flatly refusing to turn the play calling over to his offensive coordinator, he made a call that was a classic example of snatching defeat from the jaws of victory. The Browns were at home, their record was 6 and 8, but they still had their pride on the line and they were playing their hated rivals, the Ravens. The Browns were leading on two field goals, and through almost the entire first half, the Browns defense had shut Baltimore down. With a little over two minutes to go in the half, Cleveland had the ball, third and one on their own twenty-two. Get a first down, then another, and they go 
into the locker room with a six-point lead and great momentum. All they had to do was pick up one yard. They had Nick Chubb and Kareem Hunt, two good running backs, on the field. And Baker had his Pro Bowl wideouts. A short run or a short pass and you’ve got one of your two first downs… Or you could call a trick play: Instead of having your solid running back run, you have your quarterback pitch him the ball and have him throw a pass—or try to throw a pass while being smothered by the Ravens defense, which smelled the play. Rather than running the clock out, now the Browns had to punt with a lot of time left. Baltimore took two plays and scored a touchdown. That’s what the Ravens were doing all year. You can’t give them extra chances. Down 7–6, the Browns get the ball back. Maybe they can make a few yards, run the clock down, and get in field goal range. Or they can give the ball back after eleven seconds. Now you’ve given the Ravens another extra chance. Seven plays and they’re in your end zone again. Half-time score: Ravens 14, Browns 6. Final score: Ravens 31, Browns 15, Kitchens done. And Baker Mayfield’s promising second year was a disappointment.

So is Baker Mayfield finished? No. Is he a lost cause? Hardly. He’s still an enormously talented guy. Which side of the 50-50 rule is he? I’d say slightly on the good side. Maybe a new coach… Maybe a new GM… Maybe another year under his belt…

Sam Darnold—so far, not Joe

It’s 1968. A kid with a busted nose and a cocky attitude from a Pennsylvania steel town and Alabama football has somehow led the New York Jets to Super Bowl III (the first AFC-NFC Championship Game to even be called the “Super Bowl”). The Jets are taking on the daunting Baltimore Colts. The Colts are favored by eighteen points. The Jets shouldn’t even show up. But the kid goes on national television and guarantees a win. Just publicity? Just trash talk? No, they win. The New York Jets beat the mighty Colts 16–7. The world changed that day. The AFC was real. The Jets were a force. Joe Namath was a god.

That was fifty-two years ago. New York Jets fans have been waiting for a brash, bold, winning successor to Joe Willie Namath ever since. They’ve had thirty-one starting quarterbacks since Namath. The Jets used the number three draft pick to take Sam Darnold. He is talented, athletic, and had a stellar college career. He is not brash, or bold, and so far, he is not winning. The wait goes on.

In the pre-2018 draft days, the debates raged over who should be number one: Mayfield, Darnold, or maybe Josh Allen. The experts were divided; plenty had Darnold at the top. He had good numbers at USC in year one, beating Penn State in the Rose Bowl, and in his second starting year he led the Trojans to the Pac-12 Championship and the Cotton Bowl, and was a Heisman candidate. At six three and 225 pounds, a star athlete from the time he was a kid, Sam had the “look” of a quarterback. The only question mark was his less-than-fiery personality and drive. Sam was calm—that word came up over and over—but the issue was, calm as in steady or calm as in subdued? It can be the difference between winning and losing. Here’s what he said about himself in an interview: “It’s who I am and I’m not trying extra hard. I just try to be calm.” Even his own father, Mike, said, “It’s always been a joke in our family that he was the flatliner.” So is it poise and cool under fire or is it placid and lacking fire? GMs evaluating Darnold before the draft were divided. Eric DeCosta of the Ravens said, “We liked what you saw in the tape at USC, but no one was really shot in the ass [Eric’s 
expression for ‘over the top’] with this guy. No one would stand on the table and fight for him. Everyone liked him. No one loved him.” The Jets did. They bet their future on him.

So far? So flat. Almost literally. After a rookie season to get his feet on the ground, Darnold and the Jets finished 2019 at 7-9. In the thirteen games he played in each of the last two seasons, his numbers remained very consistent… and average. In 2018, he had just over 400 pass attempts, completing under 60 percent, for 2,865 yards, averaging 6.9 yards per attempt (which is low), with 17 TDs to 15 INTs. The 2019 season showed very similar results: a little better completion percentage at 62 percent, but still only 6.9 yards per attempt, and a slight improvement to 19 TDs to 13 INTs. After an 0-4 start, and after Darnold missed three games with mononucleosis, all losses led by another 2018 draft QB, Luke Falk, the Jets and Sam came back in week six to upset the Cowboys 24–22. Darnold threw for 330-plus yards and two TDs. But the good news didn’t last. The Patriots came into New York and shut out the Jets 33–0 in week seven, when Darnold threw four picks and had 34 percent completions. And that loss was followed by two more, even one against the lowly Dolphins, who got their first win of the year. But, at week ten, the Jets had something of a turnaround, finishing the season with a 6-2 run. Darnold did have some good games. Against the Redskins, he was 63 percent on 30 throws for 293 yards and 4 TDs. For his starts, he went 7-6, technically a winning record… if only a football season were thirteen games instead of sixteen.

What was Sam’s leadership style in the face of setbacks? Pretty much as expected, the usual sports clichés. After dropping the week-one game to the Bills, Darnold said, “We just need to bounce 
back… We’ll come to work and get ready for Cleveland.” He was ruled out for the Cleveland game, the first of his mono misses. Later, after they fell to Miami, Darnold offered textbook support for his coach and more standard media yak: “Coach Gase is one of the best coaches I’ve ever been around… It’s just about staying consistent and executing and putting really good drives together.” The only time he showed signs of emotion, unfortunately, was during the Patriots debacle, when he was miked up, and after a turnover, he said, “I’m seeing ghosts,” not exactly the kind of inspiration you want for your team. At least it wasn’t flat. It was real. Probably every NFL quarterback has felt that way at some time in his career. It’s like the world is crashing in on you, because it is—rhino-sized linemen and circling vulture cornerbacks seem too big, too fast, too many.

Bottom line
: It’s hard to see where the upside is for this guy. Although he’s been on a weak team, he just doesn’t seem to do anything special. The fact that the Jets brought in a quarterback whisperer in Adam Gase to tap into and bring out Darnold’s potential, and he comes up with virtually the same results and level of play… well, that is concerning. More than concerning. In fairness, Darnold was out for part of the season. But the NFL doesn’t allow you much time to heal. With the production of young quarterbacks like Patrick Mahomes, or the promise of the Giants’ Daniel Jones, or the growth of Josh Allen, or the phenomenon of Lamar Jackson, there’s plenty of pressure on Sam Darnold. His third season may be his verdict season. The personality/character/leadership factor of “calm” will either be his hallmark or his stain. (He’s almost the opposite of Baker Mayfield, both extremes of emotion, or lack thereof.) I used to say I like my young QBs to show a little panic—not exactly like he did against 
the Patriots, but to show emotion, to show what he can do under intense heat, how he can fight back. Seeing ghosts translates to, “I’m not seeing the field any better in year two than year one.”

So where does that leave Sam? What do the Jets do next? Build around him through the draft? Look for free agents? Make some sharp trades? Or go for knee-jerk reactions? Right after supposedly giving GM Mike Maccagnan free rein over upcoming draft picks, they “un-gave” it to him by thanking him for his service and replacing him with Joe Douglas. Joe is a smart guy; he was a scout for me at the Ravens and he really knows his stuff on player personnel. But, unfortunately, this is another knee-jerk management move from a team with a history of knee-jerk management moves. They say the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over and expecting different results. New GM. Second-year coach—now on the hot seat. Third-year quarterback. Here’s the good news for Sam. The new GM is the same Joe Douglas who, when he was head of player personnel for Philadelphia during the 2018 draft, had Darnold at the top of the Eagles’ draft board. The Eagles didn’t need a quarterback (or so they thought at the time), and they didn’t have a high enough pick to get him anyway. Joe liked Sam then and he likes him now… though, having not picked him at the Jets, he isn’t personally invested in him. It’s now or never for Sam Darnold.

Josh Allen—tipping point

On Friday and Saturday in late November, the temperature was in the mid-forties in Miami, cold for Florida, toasty for visitors from Buffalo. By game time on Sunday it was 72 degrees—no excuses for anybody. The Bills take the opening kickoff. Devin Singletary runs for twenty-two. No huddle. Allen throws to McKenzie for six. Allen throws to Knox for nine. First down. Singletary up the middle for one. Third and nine. No huddle. Allen throws to Beasley for four. Bills field goal. Defense stops Miami. Punt. Bills repeat the opening drive for three more. Defense stops Miami. Allen passes to Brown for twenty-four. No huddle. Allen passes to Beasley for seven. Allen drops back, looks, moves, finds Brown for a forty-yard TD. From then on it was Allen, Allen, Allen, with a healthy dose of defense, defense, defense. He threw for 256 yards, ran for 57, did not fumble, did not throw a pick, did not even take a sack. Josh Allen was named AFC Offensive Player of the Week.

If most weeks had gone like that, we’d have a real handle on Josh Allen. Instead, he’s still the biggest unknown among the QBs of the 2018 draft class. Going into 2020, he is the most difficult to evaluate, with mostly positive reviews, some looming question marks, but he’s definitely the one who could tip the balance to the positive or negative side of the 50-50 scale. Allen has been playing on a solid team, the Bills, that runs the ball well and plays what has been a powerful defense. The other side of the ball—a good defense—is never a small thing for an up-and-coming quarterback. Or any quarterback. Take it from a head coach—me—who was hired by the Ravens for my record in steering the offense for the Vikings, came to Baltimore, and won a Super Bowl, not with offense but with one of the all-time great defenses in the NFL, plus special teams standouts and a can’t-miss kicker. Our greatest offensive weapon was our defense. The 2000 Ravens defense held opponents to a record-setting low of 10.3 points per game. All we had to do was score one touchdown and two field goals to win. There’s no overestimating the value of a great defense to an offense, and to a quarterback.

That’s not to take anything away from Josh Allen. He has shown signs of his own that are hopeful. But he’s sent up some worry flares too. On the plus side, the run strength of the Bills—including Allen, who was third on the team with 510 yards behind his two running backs—racked up over 2,000 yards on the ground. All that running meant Allen only had to launch the ball 461 times. (Compare that with Tom Brady at 613 or Russell Wilson at 516.) Josh’s completions were still under 60 percent, but he did come up with 20 TDs to 9 INTs, a good ratio.

The team turned in a 10-6 season and made the playoffs. A good part of that success goes back to Josh Allen’s athleticism, which showed itself back in the draft. (Remember back then: The plus was his athleticism and improvisation; the minus was passing accuracy. Same plus and minus in the NFL.) When he had to, he ran and ran well. He’s not in Lamar Jackson’s category, but no one is. Allen did rank third in the NFL among quarterbacks on the ground, behind Jackson and Kyler Murray. A lot of his yards were on third downs to keep drives alive—good under pressure—and he also took the ball into the end zone nine times, ahead of both Murray and Jackson at seven each.

But when he had to throw a lot—thirty-nine or more times twice—the Bills lost the games, one to Baltimore, the other to Cleveland. Both times he was well under 60 percent, indicating he was throwing more desperately, and when passes are desperate, they miss the mark. He is good with play-action passes where he comes out of the fake and has a clear view of his receivers. Again, that agility and athletic ability to adapt. He has a powerful arm that can hit tight areas, but throwing into a zone defense is not his strength.

There’s one other thing, not a good thing: turnovers. Josh Allen had too many, and too many clustered in the same games, meaning, when things went bad, they went worse. He fumbled sixteen times in seventeen games, though he only lost the ball four times. Add that to his nine picks and you’ve got a troublesome statistic.

His promising moments: Allen and the Bills had their best game against the Dolphins (though Miami provided the highlight reels for a lot of teams this season), hitting on 63 percent of his throws for 256 yards and three touchdowns. No surprise, his worst game was against the Patriots and Belichick, who likes to chew up young quarterbacks. Allen got picked off three times and completed a dismal 46 percent of his passes. Still, with all those troubles, he and the team showed poise, hanging in on a tight 16–10 loss. Their wild card game, only their second playoff spot since 1999, was against Houston, and it was a tough game from start to finish. Thanks to their stingy defense, an early TD pass, and two field goals, the Bills scored the only points in the first half, leading 13–0 at the break. A typical, good Bills game plan. Buffalo added three points on another field goal and led 16–0. But Deshaun Watson, another quarterback improviser, was not to be counted out, running for a twenty-yard touchdown and converting for two to make it 16–8. Houston began to control the game from then on, with Watson taking the team down the field, first for a field goal and then for another TD and another two-point conversion, and a 19–16 lead. The Bills never quit, coming back with ten seconds on the clock for a forty-seven-yard game-tying field goal, which took the game into overtime. That’s as far as the Bills’ playoffs hopes went, as the Texans kicked a game-winning field goal to win 22–19.

But let’s look at Allen in that game, the good, the bad, and the 
déjà vu. The good—he rushed for almost 100 yards on 9 carries. The bad—he had to throw the ball 46 times (too many for him) and completed only 52 percent. The déjà vu—Allen fumbled, and that turnover led to the Texans owning the momentum in the second half. In overtime, on the Bills’ final drive, Allen did convert two third downs, carrying the ball himself, but it wasn’t enough and they had to punt. Watson took his team down the field again, and they sealed the win with a twenty-eight-yard field goal.

Conclusions: A good defense can keep you alive. Fumbles and turnovers can kill you. Completion percentage is the litmus test. Above 60 percent, you can survive. Below 60 percent, you can’t. And unless you’re Lamar Jackson or Patrick Mahomes or Cam Newton when he’s healthy, don’t rely on your legs to save the day.

So who is Josh Allen going to be? What’s his fate? We often equate him to Ben Roethlisberger—same-size guys with similar styles—but Josh is a far better runner than Ben. In fact, most people you know are far better runners than Ben. He averages under a hundred yards a season, and for good reason. He’s big and slow, with exactly no deceptive moves. But he can throw the ball. His completions have been well above 60 percent almost every year. He has six seasons of throwing for more than 4,000 yards. And it’s hard to take him down. So the comparison of Josh to Ben goes only so far. Roethlisberger took the Steelers to the playoffs his rookie year and almost every year since, plus the Super Bowl in years two, five, and seven, winning two of those. Can Josh Allen become Ben Roethlisberger? He has good coaching like Ben. He has a good defense like Ben. He’s big and strong, like Ben. He can take a hit, like Ben. He plays for a tough, no-frills team in a tough, no-frills market, like Ben. But he remains a question mark. At the moment, of our five QBs, we’ve got two on the 
good side—one slightly, one clearly—two on the not-so-good side—one slightly, one clearly—and Josh Allen in the middle. He may be the tiebreaker, one way or the other, in our 50-50 rule.

But here’s what may tilt him to the good side: consistency of coaching, good coaching. He’s one of only two of the 2018 first-round quarterbacks to have had the same head coach through his first two, and now third, years. Sean McDermott is working with Josh Allen and arguably making progress.

GM Brandon Beane was brought in to the Bills in 2017, reuniting him with former Panthers defensive coordinator, now Bills head coach, Sean McDermott. In their initial year together, they returned to the postseason for the first time in a long time. Together, and I emphasize that word, they picked Josh Allen. No internal squabbles. In sync. And they made all of their draft picks, trades, and re-signings that way. And most importantly, they’re two smart guys. With Allen at quarterback, they returned to the playoffs. Progress. Ownership placed faith in them and stuck with them. So far. (After all, this is the NFL.)

Josh Rosen—two and out?

Unfortunately, the high point of Josh Rosen’s NFL career so far has been the 2018 draft. Even though he was picked at number ten by the Cardinals, he was disappointed and showed it. His post-draft tweet was, “There were nine mistakes ahead of me.” Not humble, but he did have plenty of believers. Now he has fewer.

Are we being fair to Josh Rosen? Might we be giving him better reviews and seeing a brighter future if he had been picked by another team—the Browns or Jets or Bills? He’d have had plenty 
to complain about in Cleveland, with friction in the coaching-management-ownership ranks and weak talent around him even in year two, and then another coaching change. In New York, he’d have had a new coach, a lackluster team, impatient ownership, but fans who would have liked his cockiness… as long as he won. In Buffalo things might have been better, with consistent coaching and a strong defense and a playbook that calls for conservative schemes, not a spotlight for a big-arm quarterback. He may well have fared better in Baltimore, but that was never going to happen: a chemistry mismatch even before the draft, and his ego would have been even more battered to be taken last in the round. Before he was drafted, the concern with Rosen was his attitude, cockiness, coachability, petulance, ego, etc. Two years later, he’s been humbled by a bad first year, by getting traded, by losing the starting job to a journeyman. Now the concern with him isn’t attitude and ego; it’s talent at the NFL level.

There’s no two ways about it. Short of a miracle, Josh Rosen is clearly on the negative side of the quarterback pick equation. He went into a bad situation in Arizona; it’s hard to imagine a worse one, but he got it when he was traded to Miami. In Arizona, the team had gone 3-13 overall and 3-10 when Rosen was on the field. In came Kliff Kingsbury who, as promised, drafted Kyler Murray, and Josh was shipped off to the Dolphins, the only team that could make the Cardinals look good. (By the way, things didn’t get much better for Arizona, finishing at 5-10-1 but with Murray showing potential.) In Miami, things went from bad to worse for Rosen. The team had fired head coach Adam Gase, hired Brian Flores from the Patriots, and sent veteran quarterback Ryan Tannehill to Tennessee. They figured Tannehill was, to coin a phrase, over the hill, 
but with the Titans, he caught fire and, along with amazing running back Derrick Henry, took them to the playoffs.

Rosen played in only a handful of games for Miami, and started even fewer. He came into the week-one game, a 59–10 disaster against the Ravens, too late to do anything and did exactly nothing. Game three against the Cowboys, Rosen started, and presided over another lopsided loss, 31–6. After a further loss and then a bad performance in the first three quarters—eighty-five yards and two interceptions—against the Redskins, he was benched for Ryan Fitzpatrick, aka Fitzmagic, the thirty-seven-year-old playing for his eighth NFL team. The Dolphins still lost 17–16 and were accused of losing on purpose to gain a higher draft pick. Meantime, Josh Rosen was relegated to the bench while Fitz finally turned in wins against the Jets and then the Colts. So much for losing on purpose. They even upset the Eagles late in the season and the Patriots in the final week, all games that Rosen just watched. When your coach chooses to bet on a guy who is the definition of a backup—solid, reliable, unexciting—then you know your future is in trouble.

Preview
: It may get worse. The scuttlebutt, conjecture, and mock drafts leading into the 2020 draft had the Dolphins using their number five pick, or even giving away a boatload of other picks for the Redskins’ number two slot (the Bengals have number one and aren’t going to part with it)… all in order to take quarterback Tua Tagovailoa out of Alabama. Tua began his college career on fire but ended it on crutches. Midway through his junior season, against Tennessee, he incurred a high ankle sprain requiring surgery, and after recovering, again went down, this time against Mississippi State, with a dislocated hip, posterior wall fracture, 
broken nose, and concussion. Despite some impressive games and even more impressive numbers, that was the end of Tua’s season, and his college days. Fast-forward: In January 2020, he declared for the 2020 draft. The scuttlebutt was right. The Dolphins used their number five pick to take him. For Rosen, it’s a pretty clear vote of no-confidence when your team is willing to give away the store to get a guy who is either a bionic man or poster boy for the injured reserve list.

Josh Rosen is undeniably a man of many individual skills and abilities. So far, they haven’t added up. The whole does not equal the sum of the parts.

Lamar Jackson—unicorn

It’s late in the third quarter and the Ravens and Seahawks are tied at 13. Two Mark Ingram runs. Pass from Jackson to tight end Hayden Hurst for ten. Runs from Gus Edwards and Ingram. The Ravens are deep in Seahawks territory, third and fifteen; Jackson scrambles and picks up thirteen, short of the first down. Fourth and two, ball on the eight-yard line. Justin Tucker, Baltimore’s virtually automatic field goal kicker, trots onto the field for a chip shot. Lamar Jackson heads to the sideline, disgruntled, not content to settle for three points. John Harbaugh asks him, “Do you want to go for that?” Jackson doesn’t take a breath. “Hell, yeah, Coach. Let’s go for it.” Lamar turns to his teammates on the sideline. “Do you want to go for it?” He doesn’t even give them a chance to answer. He says, “Let’s go for it!”… Baltimore called time-out, came up with a play call—three-tight-end formation. Jackson took the snap, saw daylight, and didn’t just pick up the first down. He took it to the end zone. Ravens led 20–13. And they never lost the lead.

That story was the story of Lamar Jackson and the Ravens’ season. Going for it in every sense—using his arm, his legs, his field vision, dodging tackles, making defenders miss, being—as his teammates and opponents put it—“a freak.” Or as I and other commentators put it, a unicorn—the once-in-a-generation athlete who can do what he isn’t supposed to be able to do. Other teams took Baker Mayfield, Sam Darnold, Josh Allen, and Josh Rosen ahead of Lamar Jackson, and none of those quarterbacks had a rookie season or second season as good as Lamar. In fact, most quarterbacks in the NFL didn’t come close. That’s a unicorn. The dictionary defines it as: “1. a mythical animal typically represented as a horse with a single straight horn projecting from its forehead,” and “2. something that is highly desirable but difficult to find…” Lamar Jackson is not mythical but he sure is “something that is highly desirable but difficult to find.”

He is the Cinderella story of the 2018 draft—the overlooked beauty who rises from obscurity to the spotlight. But maybe we should have seen him coming. Maybe some people did. Lamar was the thirty-second pick, the last of the first round. But we should all remind ourselves that the last pick of the first round is still the first round. It’s like the old joke: What do you call the person who graduates last in med school? Doctor. It wasn’t lack of talent that kept Lamar from being an earlier pick; it was the debate over how his talents would work best in the NFL. Could he put his running ability to work at the pro level? Could he throw at the pro level? Could he up his completion percentages with better receivers? Could he run and pass and scramble and stay healthy? Or should he be a wide receiver instead? It turns out the answers are yes, yes, yes, yes, and no.

If there were any doubters, they disappeared in the Ravens’ first game of 2019, where the Ravens pummeled the Dolphins 59–10; where Jackson threw for 324 yards and 5 touchdowns—23 completions on 26 passes; where he connected on an 83-yard pass play to Marquise Brown; where the team gained 265 yards on the ground, led by Mark Ingram’s 107 yards; where the team went 2 for 2 on fourth-down conversions; where they ran up a time of possession of 40 minutes versus just under 20 minutes; where even backup quarterback Robert Griffin III picked up a touchdown; where Lamar Jackson, accused of relying on his feet too much, ran for… six yards all day. He did it all without his feet. Okay, the Dolphins are weak. But any team in the NFL should be able to keep the score under 40; any team should be able to put more than one touchdown on the board. Unless you’re taking on a unicorn. After the game, Jackson faced the press. His opening comment, made with a big happy grin on his face, was “Not bad for a running back.” Not bad indeed.

Of course, that didn’t mean Lamar wouldn’t run. It just meant he didn’t have to. But he could. And he did. Unless he used his other running backs. Or unless he threw. Or unless he dropped back to throw, couldn’t find a receiver, and ran and ran and ran. Or unless he rolled out to throw, ducked a tackle, started to run, and then threw. Or… All of the “unlesses” meant the Ravens were a bigger threat than defenses could prepare for. Defenses had to stop eleven players on the offense instead of the usual ten. The quarterback’s threat is most often his arm. Not so with Lamar.

Between the 2018 and ’19 seasons, as promised, the Ravens constructed a team around Lamar Jackson. Besides signing running back Mark Ingram from the Saints and drafting Justice Hill, 
they added wide receivers “Hollywood” Brown and Miles Boykin, to join their tight ends Hurst, Andrews, and Boyle.

According to sources inside the camp, John Harbaugh said something to the effect of “We can’t run a West Coast offense [Joe Montana’s offense with Bill Walsh], so let’s tailor this thing to what this kid can do.” They were all in. (They even rebuilt a defense for him, filling free-agency losses with future Hall of Famers Earl Thomas from the Seahawks and Marcus Peters from the Rams.) The promotion of Greg Roman to offensive coordinator and putting James Urban in as quarterbacks coach were further commitments to the new game.

I asked Roman to reconstruct what unfolded. First he was candid about the early assessments of Jackson. “We saw and were intrigued by the special abilities Lamar had, but honestly, I could not say we took him knowing he was going to be the MVP in his second year.” The Ravens were counting on Joe Flacco, with Jackson as a “just in case.” But events intervened, as they always do. Inside the cloud of Joe Flacco’s injury was the silver lining that allowed the Ravens to see what Jackson could do. As Greg tells it, “What happened with Lamar was the perfect sequence of events that got us to this point. Came in as the backup, had a chance to refine his skills, then got put into the game, and with his special skills got us to the playoffs. It is hard to imagine we would have been able to totally commit to Lamar’s style of play without seeing what we did at the end of 2018. What did leap out early is that he had rare vision. He sees everything quickly at the snap of the ball.”

In the 2019 season, Lamar Jackson put up numbers that are mind-boggling. And he did it over and over, all season, not in a game or two, not against one team or two, not playing a certain 
type of defense, but against everyone and everything. His college completions averaged 57 percent. His second year with the Ravens, he was at 66 percent, throwing 401 passes for over 3,000 yards, with a staggering 36 TD to 6 INT ratio. And he hardly abandoned the run, chalking up 1,206 yards and 7 touchdowns of his own. Lamar Jackson, quarterback, ranked sixth in the NFL among running backs. His remark “not bad for a running back” turned out to be more than a punch line; he 
was
 more than not bad for a running back.

But of all the stats, one of the most telling is what he does under pressure. Defenses like to blitz young quarterbacks, even if it’s not the best way to contain them. They like to shake up the kid. They want to break his concentration so he misses his reads, or has to scramble in the backfield. Too bad for those defenses, because Jackson loves to scramble. It’s one of his best plays—finding a way to keep the play alive instead of taking a sack or throwing the ball away. Remember what Eric DeCosta saw in Lamar’s college performance? Well, it turned out to be dead-on. Pressure was no pressure. Opponents threw their best blitz packages at Lamar Jackson so he had to scramble thirty-nine times—that’s a lot—but he still picked up eleven yards per scramble. 
He averaged a first down on every scramble.
 Here are some comps from ProFootballReference.com: Jimmy Garoppolo faced 12 scrambles all year, for 4.7 yards per. The GOAT, Tom Brady, had 3 scrambles but he did pick up 11 yards on each. Baker Mayfield had 17 for 7.9 yards each. And Super Bowl winner Patrick Mahomes, no slouch at keeping plays alive, had 23 scrambles for 9.3 yards each.

What’s next after an incredible sophomore season? At heart, despite his experience with Kaepernick and now Jackson, Roman 
is a believer in the pocket quarterback. “We will evolve the offense to more pocket passes as Lamar evolves, and we think he will. Running outside the pocket is still what he does best, and it is where he is the safest.” Is Lamar one of a kind or has Roman seen anyone else like him? Greg put it this way: “Kaepernick had this type of potential, but he could not sustain it. Lamar loves the game and loves the competition, every day.” The “could not sustain it” comment wasn’t referring to Colin’s political or social stances but to his lack of dedication to the game. The word around the 49ers was that some days he was intent on becoming the next Joe Montana, and some days to becoming a hip-hop music star. Greg says Lamar Jackson is a unicorn. If not a unicorn, a plenty rare species. And laser focused on football.

Game ten of the season, Ravens vs. Bengals. Midway through the third quarter, Baltimore is up 28–10. Second down and three. Perfect time to call Mark Ingram’s number. Jackson fakes to Ingram, keeps, but defensive end Carlos Dunlap has him. Had him. Jackson is too fast. But safety Jessie Bates is there. Was there. Feint to the left and Bates is in the rearview mirror. Jackson is into the secondary. Trapped again. For sure. They close in. Lamar… spins… 360 degrees. In midrun. Safety Shawn Williams grabs air instead of jersey. Linebacker Nick Vigil has him. No. He reaches, loses his balance, and falls, taking another Bengal with him. Clear sailing now. Touchdown Jackson! Forty-seven yards. Instead of a sack. Instead of a short gain. Instead of a first down. He gains half a buck and six points.

That’s what they call an ankle-breaker play. The defenders trying to stop on a dime wrap their arms around a hologram and trip over themselves. Commentator Kevin Harlan said, “He is Houdini!” Lamar Jackson was proving to be an escape artist.

The Ravens went on to a 14-2 season, the best record in the NFL. The Lamar accolades were constant, nonstop adoration and fawning—but well-earned fawning, and from every corner of the league and even outside of football. Michael Vick, to whom Jackson is often compared, tweeted: “Lamar Jackson 5x better than what I was at V-Tech… Enough said!!” The Seahawks’ Jadeveon Clowney: “I always wanted to play against Michael Vick, I guess I’m getting the new era with Lamar Jackson right there.” Richard Sherman, San Francisco cornerback, after their loss to the Ravens: “He knows angles, he knows leverage, he knows when to get down, he knows when to stay up, he knows when to cut back, he knows when to keep it, he knows when to bounce outside.” Bill Belichick, not known for gushy compliments, gave Jackson his highest grade—problem: “… a hard guy to handle… definitely a problem.” Sean McDermott of the Buffalo Bills: “I don’t think there’s been a defense that’s cracked the code.” Pete Carroll, Seahawks coach: “When you saw him in person, he’s faster than we saw him on film.” Sean McVay, Rams coach: “There is a reason why people are talking about him as an MVP.” Kliff Kingsbury, Arizona Cardinals: “He can stand there and throw it and beat you that way, and he can beat you with his legs.” Tom Brady, New England Patriots: “You’re never really quite sure who’s got it…” Bill Polian, Hall of Fame GM, who had originally said Jackson should be a wide receiver, felt the need to issue an official retraction: “I was wrong.” Jackson and head coach John Harbaugh developed a bond uncommon even among coaches and quarterbacks. “I love the way you play,” Harbaugh told Jackson. “You just don’t flinch. You just attack. All you do is attack… You changed the game, man.” This is a fifty-seven-year-old man professing his admiration for a twenty-three-year-old kid/magician.

Then there’s the “freak” factor. James Burgess, New York Jets: “The guy is a freak of nature. One of a kind.” Clemson linebacker Ben Boulware: “He’s a freak athlete and he can fly.” During the draft, 49ers head coach Kyle Shanahan looked at Jackson’s game films: “He’s a freak of nature.” And Ravens teammate, receiver Seth Roberts, nicknamed Lamar “ ‘Freaky-L’… he can do anything out there. He’s just freaky.” Mark Ingram became Jackson’s self-appointed publicity agent, promoting him for MVP every time he found a microphone: “I would like to introduce y’all to the man, the myth, the legend. The MVP frontrunner. If anybody else has gotta say something different about that, then come see me. I’m right here in B-More outside the bank [M&T Bank Stadium]. If you got an issue with that, come see me. I’m ’bout that! Big Truss, Lamar Jackson. In the flesh.”

“Big Truss” was a term that no one could quite explain, that Lamar brought with him from his childhood in Florida. Roughly translated, it means we are all with you all the way, no matter what, no matter where… trust, faith, belief, solid.

Jackson’s fans came from far beyond Baltimore or the NFL. Rapper Quavo, a member of the trio Migos, is a follower. Gucci Mane, another rapper, echoed the team’s slogan: “Nobody cares. Work harder.” Al Pacino said Jackson’s style was “an inspiration to actors.” The Archbishop of Baltimore brought a Jackson number 8 jersey to the pope! Even the 
Wall Street Journal
 ran a story headlined, “Stop What You’re Doing. Watch Lamar Jackson Change Football,” which opened with these words: “There needs to be a Lamar Jackson channel. I’m serious. Nothing but Lamar, Lamar, Lamar, all Jackson, all the time, 24/7.” The 
Wall Street Journal
!

It was a dream season… almost. The Ravens went into the 
playoffs with the best record in football, drawing a bye in week one and home field advantage in the playoffs. As the top seed, they would play the Tennessee Titans, a resuscitated team led by comeback QB Ryan Tannehill (discarded by the Dolphins) and anchored by the relentless, unstoppable running of Derrick Henry. A good and surprising team, but nine-and-a-half-point underdogs to the amazing Ravens and Lamar Jackson. But it’s any given Sunday in the NFL, and the Titans upset the Ravens 28–12. Dream over. Abruptly. It was a crushing disappointment for Lamar, for Baltimore, for football fans in general, in fact, who had been counting on the Ravens vs. Somebody in the Super Bowl. Lamar skulked to the sidelines. He shook his head. He was mad. He was lost. He later admitted he couldn’t even come out of his room for days. He was disappointed in himself. Understandable. But, as a leader, he’ll have to keep his head up. He’ll learn.

The reality is, Lamar Jackson was still the best quarterback in the NFL in 2019, All-Pro, unanimous pick for MVP, record setter, maybe game-changer. His head coach, John Harbaugh, was rightly declared Coach of the Year for the foresight, guts, and creativity to build a new team and new strategy around the unique skills of his quarterback instead of following the NFL tradition of trying to turn every college quarterback into a drop-back passer. How did it all happen? Why did it happen? Eric Mangini, who has been a defensive coordinator and head coach and commentator, who has been up and down and learned a lot along the way, says the situation with John Harbaugh and Lamar Jackson was “the perfect storm”—the right quarterback, the right coach, the right offensive coordinator, at the right time, on the right team. Mangini raised and in essence answered the questions that account for that perfect 
storm: Did John Harbaugh learn from watching brother Jim coach the 49ers with perhaps the only other double-threat QB in recent time, Colin Kaepernick? Did he learn from seeing 49ers quarterback coach Greg Roman create designed runs, not just scrambles, for Kaepernick? Did he learn from the second-half performance Kaepernick put on to nearly bring his team back from a 28–6 deficit in the Ravens-49ers Super Bowl? Did John go out and get Greg Roman to work the same way with Lamar Jackson? Did John and GM Eric DeCosta and Greg and quarterback coach James Urban build an entirely new offense around Jackson’s talents? Yes to all. Above all, John Harbaugh had what head coaches are not known for having—an open mind. Work with what you have; don’t try to turn what you have into something else. A simple lesson, not often learned.

Despite the postseason disappointment, the Ravens and Lamar Jackson were, and likely are, a remarkable force. If losing in the postseason early in a quarterback’s career is indicative of anything, it may be of long-term success. Peyton Manning holds the record for most postseason losses at thirteen, and nine of those were first-round losses. But he also went to the Super Bowl four times and won twice. Besides Peyton, John Elway, Dan Marino, Drew Brees, and Aaron Rodgers all started their postseason careers with losses, and it’s safe to say their NFL legacies are in good shape.

So yes, the Ravens are for real. Lamar Jackson is very much for real. He is, without question, the standout of the 2018 draft class. Most of all, he’s a one-man case study in how we evaluate quarterbacks… and what we do or don’t extrapolate correctly. We 
didn’t
 extrapolate from the data on Lamar’s cool and competency in pressure throws, a good indicator of field vision, decision-making, and 
leadership in the most adverse circumstances. We 
didn’t
 extrapolate on the wisdom and maturity of Lamar’s resolve to stick with his quarterback ambitions and not give in to conventional/old thinking on switching to a running or receiving position. And we 
didn’t
 extrapolate from his confident humility—not a contradiction in terms, but rather an ideal character trait—the ability to lead others, even those older and more established. (It’s Lamar’s version of my “athletic arrogance”—the ability plus the self-assuredness.) The data, trends, anecdotes were there if we had looked harder and “checked the film” of Lamar’s career and life, on and off the field. He was always this good. But a lot of people missed it.

Now comes the revisionist thinking. Just as experts said Russell Wilson wasn’t tall enough to make it in the NFL, and Patrick Mahomes was undisciplined and “freelanced” too much, they said Lamar Jackson couldn’t run 
and
 pass… until he did. (Maybe they should have looked at Jackson’s passing yards in college—years two and three, over 3,500 yards in each—added to his run yards—beyond almost any comp—and extrapolated from those numbers.) Now, suddenly, those skeptical experts are converts. Witness the scouts checking out previously “short” quarterbacks. Witness the worship of “genius” Andy Reid at the Chiefs, who was shown the door in Philadelphia. Witness not only John Harbaugh’s anointment as a coaching wizard, but the high demand to interview his OC, Greg Roman, for a head coaching job. Witness the accolades for Ravens quarterback coach James Urban. Witness the PSL stampede in Baltimore, where seats were vacant not long ago. And most of all, watch the other teams in the NFL saying to their GMs, “Find me the next Lamar Jackson,” or “the next Patrick Mahomes”… which, as this book shows, is not an easy feat.

