# VI

---



VI

Is the Game Changing?

Is the game changing? Yes, next question.

Is the college style of play usurping the old pro style? Is the wide-open game the game of the future? Is this a new day? 
Is the game changing?
 This question, in one form or another, has been the barstool issue of sports fans and experts for the last few years. 
Yes, it is changing; just look at Russell Wilson, Patrick Mahomes, and Lamar Jackson… No, it isn’t changing; just look at Tom Brady, Aaron Rodgers, Carson Wentz, and maybe young Daniel Jones.
 Plenty of people, me included, were hesitant to say there was a real and meaningful change in the game. Yes, passing is on the rise. Yes, scores are going up. Yes, there’s more improvising in midplay. Yes, quarterbacks are increasingly dual threats, or at least a threat and a half, running better when they have to. Yes, college-style offenses are making their way into the NFL. Yes, college coaches are here too. But the question is…

Are we witnessing unicorns—once-in-a-generation talents—or a sea-change trend in the game?

We’ve had scrambling run-pass quarterbacks for a long, long time. Randall Cunningham, drafted in 1985, played for ten years with the Eagles and put up almost 30,000 passing yards and nearly 5,000 rushing. Going way back to a QB drafted in 1961, the Vikings’ Fran Tarkenton had over 47,000 passing yards and 3,600-plus running yards, and he’s the guy who popularized the term “scrambling quarterback.” Michael Vick, with the Falcons and the Eagles, threw for over 22,000 yards and ran for over 6,000, with a 1,000-yard single season. Did we say these guys were changing the game? No, we just said they’re outstanding talents at quarterback. Just like Joe Montana, Terry Bradshaw, Dan Marino, Peyton Manning, Drew Brees, and Tom Brady.

So what makes people say the game is really changing this time? It’s not just the numbers, it’s the style of play. What we’re seeing is an updated Tarkenton style—quarterbacks reading the defense and modifying in real time, with last-second audibles or play-action improv, literally changing the call in midplay. But now it’s being executed with even more innovation, more options, more sophisticated plays, more data, and a whole lot more preparation from playing that way in college.

For a long time the popular wisdom was that the college approach wouldn’t translate to the NFL, where the linemen are bigger, the safeties stronger and more agile, and the secondary is faster. No matter who that quarterback faced in college, now he’s facing the elite defensive players from every conference, from every 
top college team, from every bowl game. These guys can adjust on a dime and they’re not easily fooled. But, it turns out, this new breed of quarterback can also adjust on a dime, and they’re not easily fooled either. And most importantly, the quarterback and the offense initiate the play; the defense reacts.

When Cam Newton joined the Panthers, he didn’t adjust to the NFL; it adjusted to him. He put up almost 30,000 yards in the air plus 4,800 with his legs… by age thirty. Russell Wilson, also only thirty, has piled up nearly the same numbers. Now the defenses are the ones scrambling. Then along comes Patrick Mahomes and the game is thrown even more wide open. We simply don’t know what he’s going to do on any given play—drop back and throw deep, roll out and throw short, or cut back and run, or start to run and throw sidearm to a running back, or change his mind twice during the play and drop back and throw deep. He’s only twenty-four and he’s already thrown for over 9,000 yards. He hit 5,000 in one season! Now there’s Lamar Jackson, who is a whole lot more than a scrambling quarterback. He uses run-pass options with designed runs—runs designed for him, not his running backs. He’s connecting on well over 60 percent of his passes, while he’s gaining enough yards on the ground to be ranked with the top running backs. He is, as the opposing coaches say, that eleventh man to worry about.

And in case you still doubt the game has changed, ask coaches, players, and talking heads about defending against this new breed. Von Miller, Broncos linebacker, on Patrick Mahomes: “It was a whole other level.” Bill Belichick: “If the ball is on their twenty-yard line, you’ve still got to defend the goal line against him.” Titans offensive lineman Taylor Lewan: “Yeah, he’s like 
really good at football.” Pat McAfee, former punter and now analyst: “Patrick Mahomes is just an alien.” Belichick on Lamar Jackson: “There’s not another quarterback in the league like this.” Patriots cornerback Stephon Gilmore: “He can outrun anybody on the front seven probably, and probably in the secondary too.” Ex-Ravens, now Rams safety Eric Weddle: “Russell Wilson’s playing out of his mind right now.” Hall of Famer Troy Polamalu on Jackson and the new breed of QB: “I don’t think we’ve seen anything like him… But [now]… there’s a lot of quarterbacks that really are true dual threats that can throw the ball [and] that can run the ball.”

The accolades and admiration go on and on. From teammates and from opponents, especially the ones who’ve just been beaten by this new style of play.

That’s a pretty solid case that the game is changing. Or is it?

Is it the individual talents of great athletes, something we’ve always had—guys with big arms, or guys who use brute force, or guys who read defenses, or guys who have pinpoint accuracy, or guys who inspire their teams, even guys who can run or pass or both and make defenses crazy? Or is it a trend line toward a new era in the game of professional football? 
Here’s an irreverent answer: What difference does it make?

Whether the game itself is changing may not matter. The guys we’re seeing are 
game-changers
. They can change individual games with their unique skills. But for that to result in a transformational change in the pro game, the coaches have to embrace the change. Do they? Will they? Why? Why not?

When old style meets new style, something has to give

If college-style offensive schemes, mobile quarterbacks, and a wide-open game work, why don’t we change even faster? Because, as ironic as it seems, success often leads to complacency. 
I know what works.
 Until it doesn’t. No matter how different, exciting, bold, game-changing players who come out of college may be, change isn’t up to them. Change on an NFL team doesn’t start with players; it starts with the coaches. If coaches, or any leaders in any endeavor, have had success with one way of doing things, they tend to stick with it. Often way too long.

Change is hard. Especially if you’ve had success.

If, as we’ve seen, coaches lose their jobs when their old ways of coaching sputter, why don’t they change, or try to change, before they get the pink slip? Some are stubborn. 
I’m smart. I know what I’m doing. Look at my record.
 Some are too old. 
I’ve always done it this way. I’m not chasing some fad.
 And some just don’t know how. 
Huh?
 That’s not just me saying it. It’s gurus with much fancier degrees than I have.

Trying to explain that phenomenon is the basis of a research project and paper published by, of all places, the Harvard Business School (in their 
Working Knowledge
 publication). Three academic scholars (armchair quarterbacks, it’s safe to say) explored the parallels between business leaders who are reluctant to change in the face of business reversals and NFL coaches who have the same it-can’t-be-me affliction. Their work delves into why business bosses get replaced after weak earnings reports and the NFL seems 
to get rid of coaches every December. Hint: It is not just to send them home to spend the holidays with their families.

We spoke with Harvard Business School professor Boris Groysberg, who along with two researchers, Evan Hecht and Abhijit Naik, wrote the article “What Football Firings Teach Managers About Staying Relevant.” In it they refer to “Black Monday,” the day after the NFL regular season ends, the day the coaches are given their pink slips. The authors point to the six casualties of 2018 and draw parallels to the fate of executives in various industries. Not only are the business world and sports world equally impatient for results, but the time each allows for success keeps getting shorter. In sports it can be one losing season. In business it can be a quarter or two with no dividends. In an age of increased reliance on metrics—we can measure everything—coaches and business execs are sitting on hot seats. Granted they’re plush, leather, gold-trimmed hot seats, but they’re getting hotter every year. As the article authors say, “It is more important than ever for managers to make increased efforts to stay relevant and protect against skill obsolescence.” They suggest that business managers study what they call the “NFL coaching carousel.”

I agree with everything Groysberg and his colleagues conclude. And I’ve added some color and evidence from my own observations—Harvard with a dash of Billick (Brigham Young University, ’77).

Groysberg and Billick agree that certain managers/coaches/leaders do keep up impressive results by “adapting and staying relevant, while others do not.” The Harvard prof and his colleagues created a model to analyze the connection between a coach’s time on the job and effectiveness in the NFL, from 2000 to 2015, using 
winning percentage as the key measure. They factored in many variables, including the following: (1) coach tenure, (2) player quality (somewhat subjective but, due to data, pretty quantifiable), (3) team salary (not an absolute, but a good indicator), and (4) injuries vs. active players. The bottom line: The peak for a head coach is six years. Well, guess what? Check out the actual tenures of coaches. Either they get the boot after about six years or their performance drops and they ride on past glory for a while longer… but arguably should’ve gotten the boot. Up to year six, it’s the opposite. As the coach notches more seasons, team records tend to improve… until they hit a ceiling (postseason appearances, division titles, and sometimes Super Bowls). After that, on average, most coaches—not all—tend to head south on the data curve. At that point, fans, sportswriters, and most importantly team owners get impatient.

Statistically, they all have pretty good reasons for that impatience. On average, winning percentages for all coaches combined for the first half of their tenures were 15 percent higher than in the second half of their tenure. The authors called this, appropriately, “the second-half tenure penalty.” A drop of 15 percent is kind of the equivalent of a 15-yard penalty on the field, a big setback.

What about coaches who stay longer vs. those who don’t? Again, no surprises. Super Bowl winners get to stay longer—an average of ten-plus seasons—as do coaches who make the postseason, even if they don’t get to the big game. And neither group incurs as drastic a second-half decline. Conversely, non–Super Bowl coaches, short-tenured coaches, and first-timers get hit with the biggest penalties—losing seems to lead to more losing.

Then there are those coaches who hardly suffer from the penalty at all and have long tenures, ten or more seasons with one 
team, and seem to keep winning. The best ones “stay consistent and win over long periods of time due to exceptional management skills.” It looks like the same skills that coaches need to stay current are the ones that business managers need. Otherwise, both become casualties, clinging to past methods long after they stop working.

So when we look at Andy Reid, we see a guy who won with Donovan McNabb at the Eagles but not with his next few quarterbacks. He could have concluded, 
Hey, my way works, I just haven’t found the next right guy
. But the team got impatient and he got fired, which may have been a good thing. Nothing clears your mind like sitting on the couch wondering where your next job will come from. Andy landed the head coaching job with the Chiefs and got paired up with a young quarterback who didn’t fit the old pocket-passer mold. Did he try to reshape Patrick Mahomes, or did he adapt, taking what he had in Mahomes and building around him? The 2020 Super Bowl trophy answers that question. Same goes for Pete Carroll, who took a too-short but mobile QB and remade the Seahawks and maybe the entire definition of a franchise quarterback.

The best case study of all may be John Harbaugh, who had won a Super Bowl with a classic drop-back QB in Joe Flacco, then stalled when Flacco stalled. But thanks to Ozzie Newsome, Eric DeCosta, and the good fortune of the final pick of the first round of the ’18 draft, he had the exciting but unknown quantity of Lamar Jackson to come in from the bench. Did he jam Lamar into a Joe scheme? No. He modified on the fly, halfway through the season, and Jackson led the team back to the playoffs for the first time since 2014. Then Harbaugh and DeCosta did a total offensive rehab in the 
off-season. And the team went 14-2. John didn’t let previous success stand in the way of change.

You’d think the annual December purge, combined with the turnaround success of those who are willing to embrace open-mindedness, would lead more coaches to pry their minds open. You’d think…

But more is undergoing change than coaches, offensive schemes, and designed runs. A lot more. Our whole definition of what constitutes a promising quarterback is changing. What we thought we knew we are now rethinking. To put a twist on former secretary of defense Donald Rumsfeld’s “known knowns”—facts—“known unknowns”—what to look for—and “unknown unknowns”—where the surprises lie—we’re finally taking a hard look at the latter category. That’s where we will redefine who to draft, when, and why.

Mobility—weapon or vulnerability?

You can’t have a running quarterback, at least not for long, because he’s going to get hurt. He’s running in the open field, being chased by guys who are bigger than he is, who are going to hit him from someplace he can’t see—behind him, next to him, and maybe two or three of those big guys at once—and they’re going to fall on top of him. And they’re going to break him into pieces. Proof: Robert Griffin III, Heisman Trophy winner from Baylor, came into the NFL and the Washington Redskins and set them on fire in his rookie year with breathtaking scrambles and runs—815 total yards on the ground, including one run for 76 yards—while completing his passes at over 65 percent, for 3,200 yards and 20 TDs. But he got hit in game thirteen against the Ravens, by Haloti 
Ngata, six foot four and 338 pounds, and suffered an LCL sprain. RG3 returned two games later (maybe he shouldn’t have) and then went into the wild card game. He got hit again, came out again, went back in again (definitely shouldn’t have), and limped off the field with a torn LCL, ACL, and meniscus that had to be reconstructed altogether. He has not been the same since. Ironically, he’s now the backup to Lamar Jackson at the Ravens. Hot career as an open-field runner. Done after a season or two at most. Other run-prone QBs like Michael Vick, Randall Cunningham, and Donovan McNabb each lost a season to injury. Running is dangerous. Case closed.

Not so fast. Classic drop-back quarterbacks Tom Brady, Ben Roethlisberger, Peyton Manning, and Aaron Rodgers each lost at least a season due to injury. Nobody likes to run less than Brady (he throws the ball twenty times more than he runs!). Okay, maybe Big Ben likes to run less and is even slower on his feet. All of these guys are pocket quarterbacks. And none of us can forget the hit to Redskins star Joe Theismann when he got clobbered by Giants Lawrence Taylor and Harry Carson on 
Monday Night Football
. We all watched on national television when Joe’s right leg almost literally crumbled, a compound fracture of the tibia and fibula. It was ugly and career-ending. And he had been standing in the pocket.

Here’s what Joe Flacco said about his opponent, run-threat Colin Kaepernick, before the 2013 Super Bowl: “Quarterbacks like [Kaepernick] are eventually going to have to become mostly pocket passers to survive in this league.” The Ravens won the Super Bowl so maybe Flacco was right. But Kaepernick almost single-handedly led a second-half comeback that nearly took the win away, so maybe Flacco was witnessing the league’s and his own future being written.

Which is it? Mobile is dangerous or mobile escapes injury? The pocket is protection or the pocket is an easy target? Up to this point we’ve been going by so-called data that was largely anecdotal. A smaller guy gets hit by a bigger guy or guys while he’s in motion and vulnerable. What looks dangerous must be dangerous. Too much risk to a franchise quarterback and his team. The data hasn’t been data because conventional wisdom was that an NFL quarterback should be a pocket passer. From Bart Starr to Joe Montana to John Elway to Tom Brady. Finally, we’re looking at the real numbers harder, more closely, and without the historical prejudice.

Here is some real data from John Verros of Sports Info Solutions, which gathers and analyzes numerical data in multiple sports and, by the way, is co-owned by the wonk of all sports wonks, baseball stats guru Bill James. Now Verros, a young wonk himself, has actually studied the issue of running quarterback risk like a mathematician or statistician instead of a craggy, cranky veteran scout sharing years of sage assessments. 
Running QBs run into trouble.… Long runs make short careers.
 Verros determined that the actual, documented risk of injury on a designed run is 1 in 236 plays. What about a scramble? Admittedly, it’s a higher risk; the QB gets injured once in every 91.7 “events”—that is, knockdown, sack, designed run, or scramble. For comparison, that supposedly much safer pocket passer gets injured once in… 92.5 such events. That’s a 0.8 difference. In a game that is physical and therefore carries danger, no matter what position you play or how you play it. Even placekickers get hurt. But some plays must be more dangerous than others, right? For sure. And Verros determined that a “knockdown”—when a quarterback is taken to the ground while passing, in the middle of the throw—is “the most dangerous play 
type, because the quarterback is unprepared for getting hit while focusing down the field to attempt a pass.” That means he could be hit while in the pocket or rolling out or mid-scramble, still looking for a receiver. In contrast, Verros says, “In a designed run, the QB can prepare his mindset of being the ball carrier, such as planning ahead for where he plans on going and what he may encounter during a play.” In a knockdown, Verros’s stats show the quarterback can get hurt once in a little more than 57 events. Of course, to be true to the stats, you have to factor in that the quarterback who likes to run will run more often, so he exposes himself more times during a game. It would seem so. But…

Russell Wilson has been playing for the Seahawks for eight seasons and 143 games—128 regular-season games plus 15 playoff games. And Russell Wilson, who likes to run, either as a called play or a scramble, has played in what percentage of those games? One hundred percent. In two full seasons, Patrick Mahomes has played in thirty regular-season games and five playoff games. He missed two games in 2019 with a dislocated kneecap… but he never missed a practice during those two weeks. In a half season and one full season, Lamar Jackson has started twenty-two regular-season games and two playoff games, missing one game in 2019 because the Ravens had wrapped up the division and rested him. And nobody, nobody in the NFL, ever ran more than Lamar. Okay, on the other side of the ledger, Cam Newton suffered shoulder and foot injuries, the latter of which came on a sack, not a run, and now Cam seems to have his future in question. Permanently? We don’t know. After nine years, he could be as beat up as, say… Andrew Luck, the number one pick from the year after Cam, called the best pocket passer since Peyton Manning, who just retired from football because he 
didn’t want to get beat up anymore. As a former college QB, NFL backup, Super Bowl head coach, and now offensive coach at the Vikings, Gary Kubiak, who has seen every kind of quarterback, says in his veteran wisdom, “There’s an old saying: If your guy sits in the same spot seven and a half yards behind center, the guy will get hit and get hurt.”

How do these running quarterbacks survive relatively unscathed? Partly by being in motion. It’s easier to hit a statue standing still in one place, or even in a six-yard box, than a moving target. That’s how Ben Roethlisberger got hit in a season-ending elbow injury. And how Drew Brees had his thumb dislocated. A lot of running quarterbacks played baseball in high school and even later. Russell Wilson played Minor League Baseball. Patrick Mahomes didn’t decide which sport to pick until after his sophomore year of college. Baseball players have to learn to slide. They turn short hits into singles, singles into doubles, and they steal bases. Sliding helps quarterbacks. So does running out of bounds. It may be counterintuitive to a guy on the run who sees more daylight, but it can be taught. Just look at the difference between Lamar Jackson in 2018 versus 2019. In 2018, he ran for any opening. In 2019 he ran, and then often ran out of bounds. In 2019 he gained 1,206 yards, more yards per carry than in the previous year.

Verros looked at the 2018 Ravens as a perfect case study because in one season they used a pocket passer, Joe Flacco, 
and
 a mobile quarterback, Lamar Jackson. When Jackson was on the field, the Ravens, as a team—not just Lamar vs. Joe—averaged two more yards per carry than when Flacco was on the field. Why? Because defenses relied heavily on six defensive back personnel (dime package) to try to contain the speed of Lamar. And that 
created an opportunity for other runners. Ravens running back Gus Edwards had a great year, thanks to Lamar Jackson just being on the field. Opposing defenses also played less man coverage with Lamar at QB (31 percent to 43 percent), and blitzed slightly less often, leaving him more time to find receivers in a pass play. Advantage: mobile quarterback.

Still, the skepticism of the mobile quarterback persists. Still, conventional wisdom rules. It’s almost as if being a successful runner makes you a target for criticism, while being a lousy or at least reluctant runner makes you a better NFL quarterback. Now, that’s illogical. That’s what’s wrong with conventional wisdom. It’s old instead of open-minded.

The data, the real data, is the compilation of play-by-play, game-by-game results, comps of run-pass-option quarterbacks versus pocket passers, actual hits, actual injuries, actual games played and games missed, then extrapolated into conclusions. And the conclusion is… drum roll… running quarterbacks are successful. So are pocket quarterbacks. It’s not significantly statistically better to be one or the other. It’s statistically better to be a better runner than other running quarterbacks. It’s statistically better to be a better pocket passer than other pocket passers. And it’s statistically better to combine the two skills when you need to. In other words, the game is wide open to talent, pure superior talent. And that is a change. The prejudice of the pocket passer over the runner is subsiding—maybe slowly, but it is on its way out of town. That doesn’t mean mobile quarterbacks are the only way to go for the future. It’s that now we finally recognize how effective they can be, for an entire career, not for a fleeting moment. Good is good. It’s a meritocracy… almost.

The B-word

There’s another element that is changing in the game; this one more delicate to deal with. The color—that is, ethnicity—of quarterbacks. And what color has meant over the years. Black quarterbacks have been around the college and professional game for decades. Marlin Briscoe was the first to start for a pro team, the Denver Broncos. James “Shack” Harris was early in the game and one of the first to go on to become a team executive. Warren Moon, of the Houston Oilers, was the first Black Hall of Fame QB. And Doug Williams of the Redskins was the first to win a Super Bowl. But quarterbacks of color have been few and far between. Until recently.

There has been a stigma, unstated, or stated in euphemisms, that relegated those quarterbacks to a different status than their white counterparts.

For years, Black quarterbacks were characterized as runners more than passers. Another preconceived notion, accurate or not, about the notable speed and agility of Black athletes overall, tended to be applied to quarterbacks too. Sometimes the compliments were veiled criticisms. Terms like “dual-threat,” instead of suggesting the guy could do two things, not just one, meant he was really a run-first guy who maybe wasn’t quite good enough as a pocket passer to be an NFL-level quarterback. Before he came out of Clemson to enter the 2017 draft, Deshaun Watson said in an interview with Bleacher Report, “People think, ‘Oh, he’s a Black quarterback, he must be dual-threat.’ People throw around that word all the time. It’s lazy… People have their opinions, and I can’t change them. But I can show them what they’re missing.” And he has done just that.

Even the word “athletic” has sometimes been code to suggest a player was more physically adept and perhaps less of a thinker. And quarterback is the ultimate thinking position on the field.

The progress of Black quarterbacks has been historically too slow, from high school to college, and then from college to the pros. But eventually, every coach, every team, every fan simply wants to win. So the best players emerge, regardless of height, weight, ethnicity, style of play, or style of hair. It’s happening. The best are just the best.

James “Shack” Harris has had not only personal experience as a quarterback of color, but also a perspective from the front offices of NFL teams. After his playing days, he went on to become an executive, first at the Ravens—where I worked with him—as director of pro personnel, then in Jacksonville as VP of player personnel, and later with the Lions as senior personnel executive. Harris also was on the NFL committee on college relations. I asked him for his take on current quarterbacks and the issue overall today. Looking back, he said, “Vince Young was the last QB that had the type of talent Lamar Jackson has. The problem was, Tennessee tried to make Vince Young more of a pocket QB than he was.” Have things changed in that regard? He says that today, “Coaches just want to win. That part is color-blind. But we [football] still think of QBs a certain way and are now just getting to the point we think of Black quarterbacks the same way we do other quarterbacks.” The bottom line is winning. That’s the most valid reason to change anything, always—that it works. But Harris adds a note of caution, likely based on experience. “I’m not sure we don’t still have a certain way we look at Black quarterbacks.” Even if winning ultimately rules, the residual views linger.

Personally, I played probably more quarterbacks of color than any other NFL coach—Warren Moon, Randall Cunningham, Tony Banks, Anthony Wright, Steve McNair, Troy Smith, Jeff Blake. I didn’t play them because I was crusading. I played them because we wanted to win, and each guy, at the time, gave my team the best chance to win. You can say, “Gee, coach, some of them were a lot better than others.” That’s the way it should be. Search for winning talent, not color of talent.

Football IQ—whatever that means… 

With the undeniable multiple talents of the Vicks, Newtons, Wilsons, Watsons, Mahomeses, and Jacksons, the game is changing and in a good way. It forces us to reevaluate the way we evaluate, to look for the unknown unknowns—all the attributes we want in a quarterback, not just the physical skills and performance data, but how smart he is, how good a decision-maker he’ll be, how fast his mind processes information. SATs don’t tell us much. The infamous Wonderlic test at the Combine has proven to be a non-wonder. A lot of coaches have a rule: Don’t draft anyone who gets less than 20 out of 50 on the Wonderlic. But Dan Marino, one of the winningest quarterbacks in history, got a 16. On the other hand, Ryan Leaf had a 27 and Johnny Manziel got a 32. So, that tells us… nothing. And IQ? Well, what’s that? In fact, the experts even came up with a term to make up for what we didn’t know—“football IQ.” It’s another code phrase or euphemism, not only with racial overtones but with jock overtones too. Football IQ is a catchall, almost defined by what it 
isn’t
—it isn’t standardized test IQ, or academics like math, science, and language. It sort of means, these guys are smart in ways 
that don’t seem smart by the usual measurements. A kind of fast reaction, rapid information processing, combat mentality. They just know where the football is going or should go. Or they can see how defenders are lined up to come at them. Or they can pick up a blitzing linebacker out of the corner of their eye. But maybe they can’t divide fractions or conjugate verbs. 
Or
… they grew up in circumstances that rewarded skills and abilities developed in backyards and gyms, on courts, on rinks, and on fields: not in classrooms, not from conventional education, but learned in other ways that show they may be smarter than all the rest of us. Finally, after years of bad tests, educational and psychological experts are developing better evaluators of what makes someone “smart.” AIQ, or Athletic Intelligence Quotient, is an attempt to explore and quantify the difference between knowledge—the accumulation of facts—and intelligence, the ability to process and act. (More on that in the last chapter.)

But the old perspectives are hard to shake. Even Warren Moon, who had to constantly prove and re-prove himself as a quarterback, complimented Patrick Mahomes on his MVP with these words: “He’s special, but does it allow more opportunity for more African American quarterbacks? Yes, because that’s kind of our game.” Moon clearly expects the battle for legitimacy of the mobile-style quarterback to go on. The reality is, it’s here. And it works. Sports is inching toward being what it should be: the ultimate meritocracy. If you’re good, you’re good.

The most important metric of all: moving the football, no matter how

Run. Pass. Hand off. Just move the ball. If there is one clear lesson we’re learning from the “change” in the game, it’s an old lesson: All 
that matters is moving the ball down the field, whether you run, or pass, or hand off, or your defense intercepts and runs the ball back for a TD. Arm strength, passes attempted, completion percentage, yards gained per play, even interceptions… none of them matter if you can’t move the ball into the red zone and then score. If you can, then it really doesn’t matter how you do it. Sure, there are lots of indicators, but if the quarterback does it in the conventional ways and it works, it works. If the quarterback does it unconventionally and it works, it works. If there’s a lesson to extrapolate, it’s to look at how many yards the quarterback manages to gain, one way or another. And how consistently he does it.

Even when it looks like something can’t be done, some guys can do it, somehow. Pete Carroll on Russell Wilson: “There’s so many plays where I’m thinking, ‘Russ, get down!’ And all of a sudden he pops out and he’s still going, and… he finds somebody and makes a twenty-yard play.” Somehow he does it. Mahomes’s arsenal includes long throws (he’s an ex-baseball pitcher), sidearm passes, no-look passes, even left-handed passes, and plenty of scrambles. Somehow he just does it. Lamar Jackson on his own play: “I just had to take what the defense gave me, and sometimes I had to run… I just had to move the sticks.” 
I just had to move the sticks.
 That says it all. That’s the game of football.

That’s true today and it has been true for a long time. Look at the stats for 2019:

Jimmy Garoppolo threw for 3,978, ran for 62. Total: 4040 yards

Aaron Rodgers threw for 4,002, ran for 46. Total: 4,048 yards

Tom Brady threw for 4,057, ran for 34. Total: 4,091 yards

Patrick Mahomes threw for 4,031, ran for 218. Total: 4,249 yards

Lamar Jackson threw for 3,127, ran for 1,206. Total: 4,333 yards

Russell Wilson threw for 4,110 yards, ran for 342. Total: 4,452 yards

As mobile QBs, Wilson, Mahomes, and Jackson got there by relying on different tools, but their totals, all well over 4,000, are within a few yards of each other. Brady, Rodgers, and Garoppolo—pocket passers—got there by throwing a lot more than running but were all over 4,000 too. They all just moved the sticks.

For historical comparison, Brady had very similar 4,000-plus numbers in his last Super Bowl year of 2018. Peyton Manning relied on his arm in his last great year of 2014, throwing for 4,727 and racking up a negative 24 on the ground. Drew Brees won the Super Bowl after the 2009 season with 4,388 passing yards, 33 on the ground, for a total of 4,421. Dan Marino, in the 1985 season leading to his only Super Bowl appearance, threw for 4,137 and ran for a minus 24, a total of 4,113. At the lower end, John Elway in 1997, a Super Bowl year, had 3,635 in the air and 218 on the ground, for a total of 3,853. And Ben Roethlisberger in 2008, a Super Bowl year, threw for 3,301 and ran for 101: total 3,402.

It’s clear that the total yards gained have increased over time. In the twenty-first century, 4,000-plus yards is the benchmark for a quarterback (250 yards per game over 16 games). So when we look at the new style of quarterback, we see guys who manage to make plays with their arms, their feet, and sometimes both on the same play. The point is, they just get it done somehow, someway, 
and that’s the sign of a leader. It always has been. Just like it is in business or politics or the arts. Make it happen. Move the sticks.

So yes, the game is changing. The biggest change is that finally the evaluation of quarterbacks may not be tilted by 
how
 they gain yards but simply whether they do or not. When we’re looking at the draft board, we ought to take a hard look at what the prospects did to just advance the ball, no matter how. Whatever works, works. Wide-open play, scrambling, pocket passes, bombs, designed runs, and high-scoring games. And by the way, fans love it.

The bottom-line factor—eyeballs mean dollars

The changing game has been good for the NFL in every way, especially the bottom line, which is, not to coin a pun, not to be discounted.

We can now watch games in a multitude of ways: in a stadium, at home on the couch, in a man or woman cave, in a sports bar, on the computer, on the phone, streaming or recorded, whole games or RedZone highlights. But we only watch if it’s fun, if the game is exciting, with big plays, big surprises, and big, big scores.

How big? Well, in every year since 2010, the total points scored in the NFL season has been over 11,000. That jumped up from hovering in the 9,000 range in the 1990s. Analysts and experts say they like close, low-scoring games. Fans like TDs, high scores, and if possible, blowouts by their team. Higher scores mean they watch more. A lot more.

After a down year in television and cable ratings, maybe exacerbated by the national-anthem kneel-down issue, viewership on every kind of device continues to rise year after year, and sky-rocketed in 2018, up 65 percent on digital devices, 147 percent on phones alone, 
due in no small measure to the exciting, unpredictable, miraculous play of the new quarterbacks. In 2019, the year kicking off the NFL’s centennial celebrations, TV viewership averaged 16.5 million per game, up 5 percent from the year before, which was up from the down year of 2017. A total of 180 million individual viewers watched at least one game in 2019. That’s more than half the country! Of the top fifty events or shows aired on TV, NFL games owned forty-seven of those slots. What is staggering here is that the total mind-boggling numbers are people not in the stands—at home, in a car, in a bar, walking, talking, working, not at the game. Virtual fans vastly dwarf in-person numbers. But the NFL revenue is very real.

As of 2019, the NFL overall, as well as the individual teams, have seen record television and alternate-platform viewing revenue. And after the dip of a couple of years ago, in 2018 and 2019, in-person attendance rebounded. PSLs that were being relinquished were snapped up or held on to. Stadium sponsorships are back up. Suites are sold out. Ticket resales on Ticketmaster and StubHub soared. Stadium concessions—food, beer, merchandise—are selling like crazy. Parking lots around stadiums are full. Sports bars are coining money. Apps for viewing are being downloaded in record numbers. Premium cable packages are hot. And apparel—football jerseys—is through the roof. It’s worth looking at whose jerseys sold best this past year. In November 2019, just before the end of the season, the number one selling jersey in America was not Tom Brady. It was not Aaron Rodgers. It was not Drew Brees. It was… Lamar Jackson. What is most significant about that is that we can expect a player’s jersey to sell best in his team’s home market, and it does. But Baltimore is one of the smaller markets in the NFL, so that means Lamar’s jersey was being bought everywhere, which means fans were watching him 
everywhere, which drives viewership, which drives revenue. By the way, Tom Brady hardly suffered. In November he was number two and Patrick Mahomes was number three (from Kansas City, another smaller market), and Russell Wilson wasn’t far back at number nine. And by the end of the season, Brady was back on top and Mahomes, after winning the Super Bowl, was a close second.

With or without packed stands, with or without TV ratings, as long as fans can get games on one device/screen/app or another, the NFL is minting money. So… is the game changing? Yes. Higher scoring. More big plays. Happy, big-spending fans. It’s moneyball—not the statistics of sports but the bottom line of sports business.

How do we deal with the change? What, if anything, can we learn? Will we learn?

A short course in embracing change—or falling on your butt

Back to school—the Harvard study and the Billick School of Hard Knocks. There are some skills that successful coaches and managers adopt. Or, as I’ve seen over and over from the sidelines and from the booth, skills they refuse to adopt and then they find themselves out of work.

Adaptability
—The NFL has evolved rapidly and substantially in recent years—resulting in higher scores—with rule changes, the use of sophisticated analytics, new offensive schemes, and more and more passing. The study’s authors point to Patriots coach Bill Belichick as one who has embraced change instead of fighting it and achieved a long, long run of success. There’s a lot of debate in the game about whether Bill Belichick is a coaching genius or a 
guy who got lucky enough to connect with Tom Brady. I’ve been in plenty of sports talk show debates—is he lucky or good or both? I’m not here to make the case for Belichick’s Nobel Prize, but I will say he recognizes reality and adjusts and wins a lot. Belichick took a team that emphasized strong defense and a run-oriented offense, with a classic careful pocket passer at quarterback, and won three Super Bowls. And then, as the game morphed, he transformed them into a pass-happy offense, jumping from number twenty in the league in passing attempts to number five, and winning two more Super Bowls. Same quarterback, different strategy.

On the flip side, the coaches who refused to budge—who stuck with what worked long after it stopped working—are too numerous to list. But they include three-time Super Bowl winner Redskins coach Joe Gibbs (who was even brought back to Washington a second time but stalled again), Packers Super Bowl winner Mike McCarthy (whose stubbornness and clashes with Aaron Rodgers were fatal), and several more. Meanwhile, Sean Payton won a Super Bowl in 2009 using a fairly traditional offense but began to change with the addition of players with specific styles and skills, notably running back Alvin Kamara, whose speed and moves gained him almost 2,000 yards in a single season. Payton has benefited from the superior play of quarterback Drew Brees but is said to be studying and thinking ahead to a new approach post-Brees. He is unlikely to try to force-fit a new quarterback into a Brees mold, but rather to create an offense around the new guy, whatever that might entail.

The lesson is: Effective managers/coaches “adjust strategy based on team personnel,” not the reverse, forcing new players into an old system.

Small advantages—
Given the NFL’s stated goal of parity (the worst teams get the highest draft picks and team salary caps) and the business world’s playing-field levelers (stock market prices, quarterly reports, investor pressures, internet access to information), leveraging even the smallest edge can make a big difference in both endeavors. For instance, it could mean finding good players that have been discarded by other teams, often in order to stay under the salary cap. Bill Belichick is a master at getting mileage out of retreads. And the Patriots have been leaders in adopting analytics, hiring a Wall Street trader to study numbers (following the lead of their hometown baseball team, which did likewise during the 
Moneyball
 revolution). Even finding rule loopholes or opportunities can lead to one play that can win one game that can make or break a season—eligibility for a pass, taking a penalty on purpose, and more.

Little by little, NFL teams, and their owners, are investing in more analytical approaches to finding and exploiting those small advantages. Case in point, Paul DePodesta, since 2016 the Cleveland Browns chief strategy officer. (DePodesta is a Harvard econ graduate and an ex–college football player, with a résumé that includes working with Oakland A’s manager Billy Beane on sabermetrics, aka moneyball.) How important is the “strategy” role with the team? Look up the front office of the Browns and after you get past the Haslam family owners, there’s GM Andrew Berry, and then Paul. Coming out of baseball, where it can take years for players to develop from the minors to the big leagues, DePodesta knows well that the results of analysis take time to show themselves. All sports teams are impatient and NFL teams are no 
exception. Paul is determined to apply what he knows, the way he knows it: rethink, rebuild, and ultimately realize the benefits. In a press conference after the Browns hired Kevin Stefanski as their head coach, Paul said, “Analytics… [is] having sure frameworks to make decisions under uncertainty… Give you a better chance of being successful, whether that is drafting a player, hiring a coach, or calling a play…” When we asked him to expand on the comment about drafting a player, he said, “Analytics don’t work by themselves. They work along with experience. And what you see in games and on film. And over time.” Will pro football give Paul DePodesta time to make his “small advantages” add up and pay off? We’ll see.

Business managers—that is, successful ones—do the same. They look for and take advantage of small advantages. Some can take the same personnel budget and make it go further than their competitors by hiring unconventionally—maybe by finding a semi-retired sales manager who knows all the customers. Or they may use data in unexpected ways—looking at travel or real estate patterns of a competitor to see who and what they’re targeting. Or they may uncover lesser-known government programs and subsidies to gain tax breaks. Small advantages add up.

Collaborate with stakeholders
—In football terms, that means making sure the team and the owners are with you, buying into your approach, whether you’re winning or not. If they aren’t, sooner or later you’ll be packing (and more likely sooner). Andy Reid remade the Philadelphia Eagles from losers into winners, made them regulars in the playoffs, and then hit a dry spell. The players were split on Reid; pretty soon so was management. Reid was out. But he was 
good enough to be back in (and winning) in Kansas City. A similar story played out for Mike McCarthy, who had led the Packers to great success with Aaron Rodgers at quarterback. When the Rodgers-McCarthy marriage hit trouble, so did McCarthy. Like Reid, he is back, but will the lessons be learned? Reid bought in to change with the innovative, decide-on-the-fly style of Patrick Mahomes. Will McCarthy have an epiphany in his next life?

Will most coaches avoid the second-half penalty? In all likelihood, probably not. Remember, in football and in business, the “team” tends to become almost brand-new every few years. You have to have strong relationships and the skills to communicate with a constantly changing pool of talent, personalities, styles, and quirks. Similarly, in both football and business, the coaches/bosses tend to be older (forty to sixty years old), while the teams—young players or young MBAs—tend to be twenty to thirty. Sometimes coaches can adjust and communicate with new players and owners. Pete Carroll had two stints as an NFL head coach—at the Jets and the Patriots—before coming to Seattle, and the third time he has built relationships with young, double-threat quarterback Russell Wilson and the team’s GM. Not everyone can do it. You have to swallow your ego a bit and say to yourself, maybe there’s another way to do things. Maybe Carroll’s eight years as a head coach at USC in between New England and Seattle, in the college culture that turns over even faster than the pros, gave him a crash course in adapting. As Kevin Stefanski told us, based on his experience and looking ahead to his challenges in Cleveland, as a coach—especially a head coach—you have to “just put your arm around a kid,” be a combination of big brother, father, and shrink, yelling at some players, patting others on the back, treating 
all players fairly but not the same. It’s no small challenge to try to shepherd fifty-some different guys all at once. Not to mention having to answer to owners who are a lot like demanding stockholders wanting to know why their dividends aren’t bigger.

Outsourcing and using experts
—Don’t try to do it all yourself. You’re not good at everything. Do use technology and science. It’s there, it’s rich, and ignoring it is running from solutions. Most important, find people who know what you don’t know. Plenty in the business world learned this the hard way. When digital tech and online commerce emerged, the old guard kept waiting for the fad to fade. Instead it took over. Companies now know what we buy, when, where we are, how much we spend, even why we buy what we buy. Starbucks knows when you walk by and offers you a deal on your favorite drink. Expedia and Orbitz know where you like to vacation, what time of year, how much you spend, and based on your past travel, where you’d like to go next. Facebook knows your friends, family, hobbies, likes, dislikes, and political views. Twitter knows who you like and what you believe. Amazon knows what you read, watch, wear, and eat. And Google knows… well, everything. Any company that doesn’t know about customer data, and how to use it, is fast becoming the next Sears.

The same goes for sports teams. Every pro team and plenty of college teams have analytics experts on board, whispering in coaches’ ears in practice, during the games, even between plays. The Harvard guys point to Sean McVay and the Rams, who hired a person just to be a “clock management expert.” The Raiders put an ex-NFL ref on staff to advise the coaches on whether to throw down the red challenge flag on a penalty. The Ravens have a young 
kid in the booth next to OC Greg Roman whose “go or don’t go” advice on fourth down goes right into John Harbaugh’s ear.

More and better data has led to some obvious changes in the game as well as some more subtle ones. First of all, better stats enable us to make better-informed draft picks… defensive player backpedal speed, lateral motion, blind-side quarterback protection, wide receiver separation, even injury history, and many more esoteric/nerdy numbers can all make for improved selections. As far as the game itself, analytics have had a profound impact: First, there’s been an explosion of passing—thanks to the college ranks. More passing has meant higher scores, and not only do high scores win games, they make for exciting games, and, as the numbers show, more fans and more revenue, the NFL’s true final score. So run-run-pass has given way to run-pass-pass. Or more run-pass options. Or plays that look like passes but turn into runs. Then there’s third-down conversions. To a large extent, they’ve been replaced by going for more yards earlier and making another first down on first down or second down, which of course often comes from more passing or bolder run plays. Going for a first down on fourth down is no longer reserved for late-game desperation; now it’s a reasonable option from almost any less-than-four-yard situation past midfield. Today, 60 percent of those plays succeed. That translates to longer time of possession. If you have the ball, that means the other team 
doesn’t
 have the ball, so they can’t score.

All driven by data. In fact, stats seem to have improved draft picks’ success at every position… 
but one
. Completion percentage, accuracy, arm strength all help push the best quarterback prospects to the top of the draft class. But no data seems to be able to help prognosticate which of those picked early, of the good ones, 
are likely to be the really good ones, the best of the best. 
No one piece or set of data can make that prediction for quarterbacks… yet.
 Data is not magic, but it gives us an edge, and edges can win ball games. If we use it right, of course. If we look for demonstrable trends and not glory moments. Collectively, used wisely, the data plus experience plus extrapolation can add up to a Q Factor.

Stay curious, keep learning
—No matter how much they win, smart coaches keep learning and get coached themselves. They turn to other coaches or experts instead of only having conversations inside their own echo chamber. Belichick got advice from Jimmy Johnson and Urban Meyer—and baseball manager Tony La Russa and Celtics coach Brad Stevens. Maybe the genius of Belichick is tapping the genius of others. Several NFL coaches say they’ve studied the records and decisions of Andy Reid, Bill Cowher, Don Shula, Bill Parcells, and the legendary Vince Lombardi. I worked for 49ers maestro Bill Walsh and learned more at his side than in all my years of coaching up to and after that. I helped him write his book, and that was a tutorial for me on how to coach an NFL team. Since then, from the booth, I have watched the young coaches, the new schemes, the innovations, the contrarian decisions, and it’s a weekly education in staying current. If you don’t keep up, you’re left behind. Again, go back to the business world: Toys “R” Us, RadioShack, Blockbuster, Kodak—all casualties of not keeping up. Smart bosses hire younger minds… and listen to them.

Be a tough grader—
Look at the outcomes, the wins and losses, the profits and losses; don’t make excuses, don’t wait for miracles. 
Results don’t lie. So, how did our 2018 draft class QBs do in an era of change?

Obviously, Jackson did well. He’s practically the poster boy for the new quarterback.

Mayfield is a pocket passer and he had good moments and not-so-good ones. Unfortunately he’s dealing with another kind of change, his third head coach in as many seasons. We’ll see.

Sam Darnold is a pocket guy who has been surrounded by a weak supporting cast. He has a solid coach so we may yet see his upside. He won’t be a mobile quarterback but he could be a better drop-back passer than he’s been.

Then there’s Josh Allen, who definitely showed some promise as a bit of a hybrid, a pocket passer who can get out of trouble and who also has a daunting defense to keep opposing scores down, a great offensive weapon for any quarterback.

And there’s Josh Rosen, the outlier, a promising pocket passer who has been saddled with a lousy team, a change of coach, a trade, another weak team, and now a very uncertain future.

Though the odds are the longest with Rosen, they can all succeed in the era of change. To state the obvious, they just have to move the sticks. No matter how. If the quarterback does it, he’s on the plus side of 50-50. If he doesn’t, he isn’t. If the jury is still out, it won’t be for long.

One more method for embracing change: what not to do

Imitation is the highest form of… suicide
—The last method for adapting to change: Avoid the herd mentality. Invoke brutal 
objectivity. A lot of teams went into the 2020 draft looking for another Mahomes or Jackson or Wilson. And a lot of teams will come out with a guy who kinda runs well and kinda throws well but doesn’t do either really well. And the teams will not be prepared to go all in on the changes required. As Greg Roman puts it, “People will move the athletic QB up the draft board because of the success of Lamar, but will make the mistake of not committing to the style of play that they need to.” Roman even went out on a limb and offered a specific caution on the upcoming draft. “I don’t know that Jalen Hurts [Alabama and Oklahoma] can be a starter and do what Lamar does, but he would be the perfect backup for a Lamar Jackson. Jalen could run a lot of what we do well.” For Hurts’s sake, let’s hope Greg is wrong. Most teams will reach, or sell themselves on a hope and a wish. For the most part, they will get poor copies, not the real deal, as they always have. The NFL is littered with the next–Joe Montanas, or Tom Brady–esque quarterbacks, or Drew Brees–ish quarterbacks. And whoever else. And none of those supposed copies are still playing. Or if they are, not as the stars we hoped they’d be.

If the game is changing, what is it teaching us? What can we learn from what we’ve done wrong and occasionally right? How can we get above 50-50?

