# 1

---



1

THE ORGANIZATION

CULTURE BEATS EVERYTHING

Champions behave like champions before they’re champions.

—BILL WALSH

Bill Walsh drove a Porsche. Well, he owned a Porsche, I should say, since I was the one who drove it. I was 25 in 1984 when I left a recruiting coordinator position at the University of Nevada–Las Vegas to join Walsh’s staff with the San Francisco 49ers. The best part of my new job as a scout was to drive Walsh wherever he needed to go. As with most things in Walsh’s world, there was no set pattern or agenda. Some days I just dropped him at home. Other days I took him to the airport or to a speaking engagement across the state. For me, the longer the ride, the better. I could hardly believe my incredible good fortune.

The assignment, considered by most to be grunt work suitable for only the youngest members of a staff, was nothing less than the beginning of my formal education in the game of professional football. What could be better? Me behind the wheel of a slick sports car as I listened to the running commentary of Bill Walsh: commentary on world events or Villanova’s NCAA tournament upset of Georgetown or military history or—his favorite subject above all others—the blueprint he was building for an advanced, all-encompassing philosophy that would transform the 49ers into the envy of and model for every other organization in sports.

By the time I arrived, Walsh was well on his way to genius status. As a longtime assistant coach in Cincinnati under the legendary Paul Brown, Walsh first changed the course of NFL history with his invention of the West Coast offense. His intricate evolution of the passing game was built around precise timing and movement. It attacked the defense by stretching the field horizontally with short passes that served almost like handoffs, getting the ball to playmakers just as they reached top speed in open spaces. After a falling-out with Brown, Walsh left the Bengals in 1975 and, after a brief stop in San Diego, spent two years as the head coach at Stanford, where he led the football team to back-to-back bowl game wins. Since he was comfortable in the school’s academic environment, the last place anyone ever expected Walsh to jump to next was the 49ers.

Most football fans today think of San Francisco as the NFL’s dynasty of the 1980s, but few remember that before Walsh showed up in 1979 the team was widely regarded as the worst in the league and quite possibly the most dysfunctional franchise in all of pro sports. The previous general manager, Joe Thomas, had gutted the organization from top to bottom. Thomas fired three head coaches in less than 12 months, including one, East Coast native Pete McCulley, who insisted that everything run on his time; that meant that the usual 7 
A.M.
 team meetings began at 4 
A.M.
 Thomas also cut talented players such as quarterback Jim Plunkett, who went on to win two Super Bowls with the Oakland Raiders. Worst of all, Thomas had traded away five of the 49ers’ top picks in upcoming drafts for a washed-up, wobbly-kneed O. J. Simpson. The game-day losses were so definitive and the weekday atmosphere so poisonous during a 2–14 season in 1978 that a disgusted 49ers assistant left the sideline on one embarrassing Sunday to sit with his wife in the stands.

In short, Walsh took over a team with no high draft picks, no quarterback, and no hope. Three years later, that team won the Super Bowl.

It got there by following Walsh’s formula, what he called his Standard of Performance: an exacting plan for constructing and maintaining the culture and organizational DNA behind the perfect football franchise. Let’s face it, the word 
perfect
 and the very idea of “building the perfect organization” are either clichés or fantasies to most coaches. Not to Walsh. Perfection drove him endlessly and, sometimes to those around him, maddeningly.

His obsession with perfection meant he constantly pushed his people, regardless of experience or position in the organization, to learn more. He was naturally curious, always searching for ways to fix his team or just better accomplish the simplest task, and he demanded the same thing of his staff. He never wanted us to follow familiar paths to knowledge. He was trying to build a lasting, self-perpetuating culture to counter the groupthink that was then pervasive in the NFL and still is today.

Walsh, in other words, was trying to “disrupt” football long before anyone thought to use that term in business, let alone sports.

From his lectern in the passenger seat, Walsh told me, “If we are all thinking alike, no one is thinking.” He was a master communicator, deftly asking questions he already knew the answer to as a lead-in to another lesson. “Have you heard of Tom Peters?” he once asked me. My first thought was, 
Is he that punter in the draft?
 When it quickly became clear that I had no clue who Peters was, Walsh began an impromptu dissertation on the merits of 
In Search of Excellence,
 the book that Peters, a famed management consultant, wrote with Bob Waterman. Walsh loved the book and urged me to head to the store immediately to buy a copy. (There was no Amazon back then.) Which, of course, I did. And reading Peters spurred in me a lifelong love of his management philosophy, as Walsh knew it would.

In the book, Peters and Waterman offer a list of eight attributes that drive organizations to become excellent. The similarities to Walsh’s Standard of Performance were no coincidence. Walsh himself said, “Running a football franchise is not unlike running any other business: You start first with a structural format and underlying philosophy, then find people who can implement it.” But if football was his business, building the finest organization was his goal.

The best way I can describe Walsh’s philosophy is that he thought of a football team as being like a brand-new automobile, believing that the finished product could be only as good as the assembly line that created it, all the way down to the tiniest bolt and the smallest detail performed by the seemingly most insignificant worker. Everything needed to mesh on and off the field. No part could survive without the others. It was a process Walsh was constantly thinking and rethinking as he built his culture of success.

His meticulousness was evident everywhere, from his spotless sneakers to his impeccable office. Once, as I was walking down the hall in the team facility, I heard him yell to me, “Are you just going to ignore that photo?” Unable to discern the offending picture, I asked him which one he meant. “The one that’s tilted sideways” was his straightforward reply. To this day, if there is a picture hanging out of line, I am compelled to straighten it. Walsh was extremely demanding in a quiet way. You never wanted to be the source of that disappointed look on his face. He was a boxer in his younger days and a military buff as a grown-up. At the same time, he could have stepped into an economics class at Stanford and held forth quite proficiently. His was, in short, a unique and powerful presence wherever he went, particularly inside that Porsche, and his voice remains loud and clear in my ear today.

Walsh’s dedication to his Standard of Performance was a way of life for him; his intention was always to use it to influence more than the game on the field. I truly believe that’s why he left the comfort of Stanford for the challenge of the downtrodden 49ers. He wanted to test his theories in the worst possible circumstances, at the highest level of the game. The fact that those theories passed that test with honors is a surprise to no one who knew the man in almost any capacity or context.

Walsh left his legacy of greatness in players, coaches, and support staff alike. He was as concerned with how the receptionists answered the phones at team headquarters as he was with Joe Montana’s throwing motion. Once, during a preseason game at the 49ers’ home field, Candlestick Park, I was in the coaches’ box, waiting for the team to return to the sideline after halftime. Suddenly, Walsh was screaming into my headset. When I asked what he needed, he said bluntly, “Remind me to fire the PA announcer. He is horrible.” That was classic Walsh, tuned in to all things 49ers, not just the action on the field.

No detail was too small, not even the location of his parking spot at the team’s facility inside the sprawling Red Morton Park recreational complex in Redwood City. He reserved the first space, closest to and aligned perfectly with the entrance, for his Porsche. That was fine with me. Each time the call came to my desk from his assistant declaring that “Coach needs a ride” I’d get excited. My understanding of the 49ers’ unique culture was about to be expanded again.

Ever seen 
The Late Late Show
’s signature segment, “Carpool Karaoke”? Host James Corden chauffeurs around a music star, a pop culture icon, or even a first lady as they sing along with the radio. But he also takes it as an opportunity to get them chatting about life. There’s something about a car’s interior, private yet informal—not to mention the dueting—that allows Corden to get an intimate glimpse into the thoughts of even the most guarded stars. Driving Walsh around in his Porsche was my version of Carpool Karaoke (without the warbling; neither of us wanted to hear the other sing).

I’ve worked with some of the greatest minds in football, and believe it or not, one common thread that bound them was a rather odd “game show” way they had of interacting with their staff. Starting in 1997, I spent almost a decade in Oakland working alongside the iconic owner of the Raiders, Al Davis, and he treated most of our interactions as if we were on 
Jeopardy!
 Davis, in the Alex Trebek role, required that I instantly furnish fully formed questions that were based on answers he threw my way. And Davis was nowhere as patient as Trebek. As soon as his secretary got me on the phone, he’d break in with some version of this greeting: “I have three things for you.” (The number varied, but nothing else did.) I never replied, instead just waited for answer number one. “You know that guy from Utah who missed a season with a knee injury?” Davis might say. My answer: You mean offensive lineman Barry Sims? (Technically, I guess I should have said, Who is offensive lineman Barry Sims?) “Yes, Sims,” Davis would reply. “How big are his hands?” If I wasn’t able to provide the exact measurement off the top of my head, I would be banned from Final Raider Jeopardy. The one thing you could never say to Al(ex) was “I’m not sure; let me look it up.” That drove him nuts. “Aw, fuck, Lombardi, I could look it up myself,” he’d snap. That was my daily interaction with Davis for most of a decade.

Bookended around my time with Davis, I worked with Bill Belichick in Cleveland and then again in New England. His game was closer to 
20 Questions.
 Detroit Lions general manager Bob Quinn worked on Belichick’s staff for 16 years, and he recently described Bill’s quiz show interrogation better than anyone: It’s 6:45 
A.M.,
 and you’re still half asleep. As you wait in line at the omelet station inside the Patriots’ practice facility, Belichick shuffles up and asks you a dozen questions about the seventh player on the practice squad. Those who weren’t ready to engage in a half-hour in-depth conversation on the spot found themselves in the worst place in the NFL: Bill’s doghouse.

Walsh’s concert was Carpool Karaoke. He liked to doodle, and in the same way that President Kennedy drew sailboats he daydreamed about building someday, Walsh drew up football plays from every era. If he caught me glancing over as he sketched, he would delight in giving me the play’s background and origin. Walsh’s mind never turned off, and writing things down seemed to be the best method he had to catalog his thoughts. He used 3-by-5 index cards and short sharp pencils like the ones golfers keep score with, and when he wasn’t doodling, he made lists of things that needed to get done in an elegant left-handed handwriting that was part cursive, part print.

Honestly, I think Walsh cherished those pencils more than the Porsche. In 1981 he signed veteran linebacker Jack “Hacksaw” Reynolds—who became the heart and soul of a 49ers defense that won two Super Bowls—in part, I’m sure, because Reynolds brought a full box of sharpened pencils to every team meeting, as if he were the world’s toughest CPA about to meet with a client. Walsh, by the way, liked to say that whereas Hall of Fame defensive back Ronnie Lott 
had
 character, Hacksaw 
was
 a character. And he was right. Hacksaw got his nickname as a senior at the University of Tennessee when, after a frustrating loss to Mississippi, he went to a Kmart, purchased 13 hacksaw blades, and proceeded to cut through his 1953 Chevy.

Anyway, with all that time to think and talk inside the Porsche, Walsh honed his Standard of Performance, writing down its 17 principles with those beloved pencils. (Walsh loved to teach more than anything, but a close second for him was making lists like this one.) These tenets would inform the creation and maintenance of a football dynasty:

Exhibit a ferocious and intelligently applied work ethic directed at continual improvement.

Demonstrate respect for each person in the organization.

Be deeply committed to learning and teaching.

Be fair.

Demonstrate character.

Honor the direct connection between details and improvement; relentlessly seek the latter.

Show self-control, especially under pressure.

Demonstrate and prize loyalty.

Use positive language and have a positive attitude.

Take pride in my effort as an entity separate from the result of that effort.

Be willing to go the extra distance for the organization.

Deal appropriately with victory and defeat, adulation and humiliation.

Promote internal communication that is both open and substantive.

Seek poise in myself and those I lead.

Put the team’s welfare and priorities ahead of my own.

Maintain an ongoing level of concentration and focus that is abnormally high.

Make sacrifice and commitment the organization’s trademark.

The Standard of Performance was Walsh’s attempt to instill a winning attitude in every member of his organization. In fact, as he admitted in his book 
The Score Takes Care of Itself,
 he was far more focused on the process of creating a culture, of establishing a foundation for sustainable success, than in drawing up the perfect game plan. His Standard of Performance wasn’t a way to define his genius; it 
was
 his genius. It was the compass that guided everything he oversaw—coaching, scouting, management—allowing him to transform the 49ers from a laughingstock to a powerhouse in fewer than 1,000 days. By accomplishing that feat, Walsh essentially used football to prove the famous dictum of another management expert, Peter Drucker: “Culture can eat strategy for lunch.” That’s why, for people inside the NFL, people in the know, Walsh’s Standard of Performance is as much a part of his lasting impact as his West Coast offense. Maybe even more.

Because the Thomas era had been so destructive, Walsh had to rebuild every aspect of the organization—from the talent on and off the field, to the quality of the workplace, to the practice fields. No detail was too small for Walsh to consider because, to his assembly-line way of thinking, only the sum of them all could produce the organization he wanted. As he was fond of saying, if he managed to perfect the culture, the wins would take care of themselves.

And so he went about teaching the team not just what to do but how to think. The team facility was Walsh’s classroom, and before long he had schooled everyone. He called meetings with each department, opened his notebook, and started to lecture on the essence of every job, how to act while doing each job, and, most important, how to improve the way the job was done. When he lectured on “culture” and the way champions behave, he got locked in, never looking at his watch or wondering where he needed to be next. It was a rare and refreshing change from the way every other NFL team was run, with every minute scheduled, bathroom breaks included.

Walsh’s first student and possibly his most important was Eddie DeBartolo Jr., and the lesson he imparted was how to be an owner. DeBartolo knew he had made a mistake when he hired Thomas, giving so much authority to a man who wasn’t the coach. Upon hiring Walsh, DeBartolo let everyone know that the coach was the boss and made it clear that as the owner he would never undercut Walsh’s decision making. That authority was the key to Walsh’s system because it created a hierarchy that avoided the common organizational fissures between front office and coaches. Walsh knew that most teams in the NFL endure their share of internal strife, or as he often referred to it, “the Civil War.” Walsh, both head coach and GM, eliminated a major source of headaches and inefficiency with a single job description. There would be no infighting or backstabbing or favoritism because he was the only voice talking to DeBartolo about the overall direction of the franchise.

Walsh turned next to the members of the scouting department. He preached to us every day about the importance of learning the whole game, of being more than typical college scouts, whom he belittled as “former bad coaches telling good coaches what to do.” Of course, this required that we go above and beyond anything we had done before. It was, however, in accordance with the first rule of his Standard of Performance: 
Exhibit a ferocious and intelligently applied work ethic.
 Work smarter, he said, not longer. He wanted us to see players not as a collection of data and stats but in the context of the schemes they ran. To Walsh, grading a player without understanding the role coaches were asking him to fill was not only scouting blindly, it was just plain lazy. We needed to scout “inside out, not outside in”; that is, our analysis had to be informed by a detailed understanding of each position on the field as defined by each particular organization and scheme. He demanded nuance from his scouts—and that was not typical.

The best illustration of Walsh’s impact on the 49ers’ scouting department was the lead-up to the 1986 draft. After the retirement of Fred Dean, one of the most relentless pass rushers in NFL history and an eventual Hall of Famer, the team struggled to create any pressure on the quarterback whatsoever. Walsh wanted to find someone in the draft to replace Dean, someone who could bring constant pressure, not just sack the quarterback once in a while.

Walsh called me into his office to discuss what he was looking for. Out came one of his famous lists. Scratching away on those 3-by-5 cards with those tiny golf pencils, Walsh had once compiled 30 specific details he believed made a great offensive lineman. Now in his hands was a list of criteria for the next great 49ers pass rusher: 6'4" with long arms, great feet, and an explosiveness off the ball. Truth be told, Walsh was not all that concerned with how this particular player defended the run or if he even had enough heft to hold up in the trenches. He had done the math—recalculated the physics, timing, and geometry of pass protection, especially in light of the wide, sluggish offensive tackles who were populating most huddles—and realized the key was leverage, reach, and quickness.

Having received my orders, I headed down to my “office” in the team meeting room and began to comb through scouting reports our staff had filed from the field. I eliminated players because they were too short or too slow or because their arms didn’t stack up, which is to say just about every single player available. When I was done, just two collegiate footballers remained. The first was Romel Andrews, a defensive end from the University of Tennessee at Martin. The other was an outside linebacker who had been converted to inside linebacker at tiny James Madison University. Some guy named Charles Haley.

I called both schools to have the players’ film (we used actual 16-millimeter reels and projectors back then) sent to our offices. When they arrived, I called in Walsh to watch with me. The lights dimmed, the projector flickered to life, and there was the 6'5", 255-pound Haley, a former high school basketball player with an explosive first move to match. Haley was also a tight end in high school, so he had giant strong hands, which he pistoned into defenders to create separation. His reach and his stride were so long that after two steps upfield and a dip of his inside shoulder, he had the quarterback in a bear hug. On the first play we watched, Georgia Southern’s excellent running quarterback Tracy Ham began an option play toward the side of the field away from Haley, leaving Haley several yards behind the ball right after the snap. At that point most defenders give up, saving their energy for another down. Instead, we watched in slack-jawed awe as Haley raced toward Ham, somehow closing the gap on one of the quickest QBs in college. Just as Ham felt Haley on his back, though, he pitched the ball to the running back. Again, in normal circumstances, a trailing outside linebacker would be left in the dust. Haley quickly and instinctively slingshotted himself off Ham, engulfing the running back in his long arms for a four-yard loss.

Walsh reached over, turned off the projector, and asked, “Do we need to see any more?” He had his guy. We took Haley in the fourth round—our patience reflecting a certainty that no other team understood Haley’s value the way we did—and he registered 12 sacks as a rookie. (Haley, though, was only one highlight of that 1986 draft, but more on that in Chapter 3.) Until Tom Brady, he was the only player in NFL history to win five Super Bowls—two with the 49ers, three in Dallas—and he finished his career with 100 sacks and a bust in the Hall of Fame.

The year before we drafted Haley, some of us traveled to the first-ever NFL Scouting Combine in Tempe, Arizona, to watch potential draft prospects work out in front of representatives of all the teams. On the practice field of Arizona State University, a long hot day extended deep into the night. An exhausted Walsh had no desire to sit through more, and so he summoned me to get the car to drive him back to our hotel. Once we were on the road, I could sense Walsh wasn’t at all happy—he was neither doodling nor making a list—so I casually asked him what was wrong. Honestly, noting his mood, I figured my question would be ignored. To my surprise, he went on a tirade about our quarterbacks coach Paul Hackett, who was thinking of leaving.

Walsh used the same incredible feel that found game-changing players such as Haley to build his coaching staff. But just because he put such an emphasis on loyalty, growth, and, above all, obedience to his standard, it didn’t mean that everyone else in his mercenary profession did. Unfortunately, Walsh took what others might consider normal job movement personally. In this case, it went beyond the prospect of losing a vital conduit of our West Coast offense. Walsh considered Hackett’s solicitation of another job to be disloyal, and that was far more damaging to team culture than any setback in strategy. Hackett had always claimed that his lifelong ambition was to learn at the right hand of Walsh. Was that all a lie? Had Walsh fallen short of his expectations? What about the standards he’d set? Walsh was furious, and for the 20 miles back to the hotel, I heard all about it.

Hackett ended up staying one more season before heading to Dallas in 1986 to become the offensive coordinator and heir apparent to Cowboys head coach Tom Landry. After he left, we began to look for two men to replace him. One would coach the quarterbacks, and the other would handle tight ends and wide receivers. Once again, Walsh gave me a specific list of criteria for what he wanted in potential candidates.

I headed downstairs to where the 49ers stored all the college media guides. This was an era of college football in which the run-heavy option was the preferred offense, but Walsh needed someone who was comfortable throwing the ball. My task was simple: I had to find bios of the few top passing offensive coordinators in the NCAA, cut them out, and glue them onto a piece of paper. The work was important, but it was not glamorous, and it wasn’t long before I realized it wasn’t so simple, either. In many cases the college offensive coordinator was actually not the guy most responsible for the air attack. Brigham Young University, for example, was one of the best passing schools at the time, but its coordinator by title was actually the offensive line coach, Roger French. I knew he would hold no interest for Walsh. I clipped French’s bio just in case, but I also clipped the quarterback coach, Mike Holmgren.

Holmgren looked promising: He was a San Francisco native, a former college quarterback at the University of Southern California, and an eighth-round pick of the St. Louis Cardinals in the 1970 draft. After his pro career fizzled, he spent a year as the offensive coordinator and quarterback coach at San Francisco State before moving to BYU. Under the direction of head coach LaVell Edwards, the school overcame its small size to become a dominant force by breaking with the game’s norms, throwing the ball all over the field. This was the kind of thinking Walsh loved. And just as had happened when we scouted Haley, Walsh took one look at Holmgren’s bio and knew he had found his next right-hand man. I picked up Holmgren at the San Francisco airport twice: once for his interview and again to bring him to his new house after he took the job.

Holmgren and I became good friends. He called me “Scooper” because I was so tuned in to what was going on around the NFL. Once in a while, though, I still remind him that with one slice of my scissors, Roger French could have been working for the 49ers instead.

The thing is, hiring coaches like Holmgren was a convoluted path to building a staff. It required Walsh to spend lots of time and energy coaching his coaches. But he lived for that kind of challenge. That was why he hired guys who were intelligent before they were anything else, guys who were not typical products of the football industry. His special teams coach Fred von Appen may still be the only coach in NFL history who read Sylvia Plath every day before heading out to the practice field. (Maybe the violence of her poetry helped prepare him for the carnage of kickoff coverage.)

Whether they came from a Mormon university or were fans of morbid imagery, Walsh wanted men he could mold and develop. He firmly believed that coaches with too much experience in other systems would have a hard time clearing their heads of old ideas to make room for new ones. Over time philosophies become rigid. Methods and styles take root in one’s DNA, making it harder to change direction or adapt to another way. Walsh was constructing something different in San Francisco, something revolutionary even, and he knew it would be very unlikely that a fully indoctrinated coach would be able to contribute to the new 49ers culture. Therefore, Walsh opted for less experienced men who shared his curiosity and displayed a willingness to learn his system and methods.

I still didn’t quite understand this when, several weeks after Holmgren came on board, I asked Walsh during another Carpool Karaoke session why he hadn’t hired an experienced pro coach. In particular, I knew that our vice president of player personnel, John McVay, had pushed for Lindy Infante, a veteran NFL assistant who had been the head coach of the upstart United States Football League’s Jacksonville Bulls until that league folded. Infante interviewed with us, and though he seemed to have all the qualifications, he left Walsh unimpressed. “My system of offense is in place,” Walsh said to me. “I’m not interested in other ideas outside the boundaries of this offense. I’d rather teach someone my system, then let their creativity take over.”

This sounded familiar, and I soon realized why. Walsh was a big believer in the business and leadership philosophies of Dee Hock, the founder of Visa, whom the author Tom Peters often referenced in his speeches. “The problem is never how to get new, innovative thoughts into your mind,” Hock said. “But how to get old ones out.”

Walsh’s ideas about hiring and culture were so far ahead of their time that even decades later the best minds in the business still struggle mightily to implement their own version of the Standard of Performance. Many have tried to copycat Walsh’s offense by hiring his former assistants and associates or anyone else who could lay claim to the West Coast lineage, believing that simply employing someone to run the scheme is enough to create the kind of success Walsh had with it. But the reason there are so many failed Walsh disciples—Ray Rhodes in Philadelphia and Green Bay, Marty Mornhinweg in Detroit, Mike White in Oakland, and George Seifert in Carolina, to name a few—is that Walsh installed way more than an offense.

Seifert’s career is the most explicit example of this misunderstanding. After taking over for Walsh in San Francisco, Seifert was 98–30 in eight seasons, winning two more Super Bowls for the 49ers. Clearly, though, Seifert benefited greatly from the culture already etched in stone by Walsh. The further away the team moved from Walsh’s leadership, the less success it had. Since losing their connection to Walsh, the 49ers, with only one Super Bowl appearance in the last two-plus decades, have not been the same. Neither was Seifert.

Seifert resigned from the Niners after the 1996 season. He went 16–32 as the Panthers head coach and was fired after a disastrous 1–15 record in 2001. Seifert, you might say, knew Walsh’s recipes—he had a complete understanding of the West Coast offense—he just didn’t understand the most important ingredient: culture.

Another example: Before University of Alabama head coach Nick Saban could become one of the greatest coaches in college football history, he had to learn the same lesson. After grinding away in the profession for almost 20 years, he got his first big break in 1991, when he was named defensive coordinator of the Browns under Bill Belichick, himself an indirect Walsh disciple. When Saban moved on to head coaching stops of his own at Michigan State and LSU, he implemented the program made famous by Walsh and Belichick. You could see it in the way he scouted players, coached his coaches, and developed the talents of each employee. And what worked for Walsh and Belichick worked for Saban.

Saban failed only once, after returning to the NFL to coach the Miami Dolphins in 2005. The Dolphins at that time were still very much Don Shula’s franchise. And why not? Sure, Don Shula had been retired for a decade, but the team had been one of the best in the NFL for a generation under his rule. As a result, though, Saban met with internal resistance as he tried to embed his own culture. There was zero buy-in to the new system, with players and executives alike balking at what they perceived to be a radical transformation. The final straw for Saban was the situation surrounding free agent quarterback Drew Brees. Saban knew the potential of the former Charger, but he was not allowed to sign Brees and his surgically reconstructed throwing shoulder. Brees signed with New Orleans instead, where that shoulder has thrown more than 58,000 yards. After missing out on Brees, Saban understood that he would never be able to get the Dolphins to do things his way, and after going 6–10 in 2006, still his only losing season as a head coach, Saban jumped to Alabama. There he had the freedom to build the organization from the ground up. All he’s done is win five national championships in less than a decade. (The man he took over for in Tuscaloosa? Don’s son Mike.)

One of Walsh’s frequently repeated decrees was “Don’t be a copycat.” It made him crazy when opposing coaches would attend clinics on the West Coast offense just so they could steal his play designs, mostly because it implied that pass routes were the key to the 49ers’ success. They missed the fundamental point, the true genius of it all, and that angered Walsh no end.

The inevitable failures of those wannabes—and the particular cautionary tale of George Seifert, for that matter—led me to formulate a little theory of my own: “The Emeril Lagasse Theory.” Lagasse, you may know, is a longtime New Orleans restaurateur and bestselling cookbook author who was a television personality in the first wave of celebrity chefs. His food is delicious and his recipes are easy to follow, yet he never feared that another aspiring cook would usurp his work and put him out of business. He knew that being able to follow a recipe is a very different thing from duplicating a particular and personal culinary ethos. It is the creator alone who understands just what the dish is trying to accomplish, and so he’s the only one who knows just how to make the ingredients work together. Lagasse also knows that, as with an assembly line or a football franchise, the smallest deviation from the process upends the final product (especially if it’s andouille gumbo). That’s why there is no need to worry about knockoff restaurants. If copycatting were a useful shortcut to success, there would be Lagasse-style restaurants in every city and San Francisco 49er clones in every football stadium.

Or, today, New England Patriots clones. The now-famous Patriot Way, the unique and uniquely powerful culture Belichick has honed over the last decade and a half, is a living tribute to Walsh’s Standard of Performance and his revolutionary organizational philosophies. And like Walsh, many of Belichick’s disciples, most prominently Charlie Weis and Josh McDaniels, have failed as head coaches after—to keep the cooking metaphor going—stepping out of the frying pan and into the fire. They knew all their mentor’s recipes; they just didn’t know how to cook them. Few grasp what was behind the dynasty in San Francisco then or in New England now: the details, the mind-set, the superhuman sacrifices made every second of every day to establish and maintain an utter commitment to the culture.

Every NFL owner wants his team to be the next Patriots, the next link in the Walsh chain, until, realizing how challenging the task is, they all lose their appetite to see an overhaul through to the end. You can’t cook up a success unless you have created the right culture. It doesn’t work.

Just ask Emeril.

