# 3

---



3

TEAM BUILDING

IN SEARCH OF PROGRAM GUYS

We are not collecting talent; we are building a team.

—BILL BELICHICK

El Camino Real, the King’s Highway, is a well-known thoroughfare that stretches from San Diego to San Francisco. On a Tuesday in April 1986 the road that once linked California’s Spanish missions carried me on an early-morning pilgrimage from my town house in Mountain View to the San Francisco 49ers’ office in Redwood City. There is nothing easy or simple about the imperfect science of team building in the NFL except maybe the commute. In those days the NFL draft was still a midweek affair that began with a yawn and a whimper at 8 
A.M.
 on a Tuesday in New York. The 5 
A.M.
 start time for the 49ers staff put me, by then a West Coast college scout for the team, on El Camino Real at 2:30 
A.M.,
 when the normally jam-packed highway was empty, with nothing but green lights the entire way. Call it the calm before the most important draft in 49ers history.

Soon enough, NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle would walk to the podium at the Marriott Marquis in New York City’s Times Square and announce Auburn running back Bo Jackson as the first pick of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. But we were in a much trickier spot. For starters, the 49ers were picking eighteenth, a spot that didn’t bode well for a burgeoning dynasty. If it was rather high for a team that had won a Super Bowl two years earlier, it was also a bit low for a team that had just finished second in the NFC West. (There were 28 teams in the NFL in 1986.) Under Bill Walsh’s leadership, the 49ers franchise was no longer accustomed to second-place finishes or to being beaten decisively in the wild card playoffs by the New York Giants, with our high-octane offense held to three points in the process, as we were in 1985. It was clear as we headed into the off-season that the owner, Eddie DeBartolo Jr., would not tolerate another lackluster finish. Of course, the only person more eager than his boss to make the necessary draft-day tweaks to the team was Walsh himself.

The coach believed that securing a handful of new starters, including an elite pass rusher and upgrades in the backfield, was our ticket back to the Super Bowl. In 1986, the draft was really the only way to find those players and to build, or rebuild, a team. Despite all the changes to the economics of the game during the last 30 years, that’s still very much the case. If anything, the finite resources teams now have under the salary cap (more on that in a bit) have only made the relatively inexpensive young talent in the draft even more valuable, and the grand art and science of talent evaluation and team building even more important. Back then, though, free agency didn’t exist; when a player’s contract expired, his team essentially retained control of him. There was the occasional difference-making trade, but for the most part, in 1986 draft picks were the gold. And Walsh needed to find his fortune.

It didn’t matter that his scouts and personnel people were calling that year’s draft the worst ever. That just made him crazy. I mean, he would go nuts, snapping back with “We only need to find 12 good players!” before stomping away in disgust. Walsh hated that kind of defeatist chatter, not least because if it was true, how could he ever improve his team? He didn’t care what the rest of the league was doing or thinking or whining about; he simply wouldn’t tolerate excuses. That extended even to speaking badly about a prospect. If someone needed to be critical of a player’s talent, he was to keep it professional. Stay clean and to the point, and don’t denigrate. Words such as 
sucks
 or 
blows
 had no part in a report. “It’s our job to find talent, not dismiss it,” he told me. His dignified single-mindedness led us to work harder than ever that spring.

Leading up to the 1986 draft, there was an unusual sense of urgency even for a workaholic like Walsh. That winter he seemed to always be calling me to fetch film of prospects or work the phones in search of more information. My job was to be on call at all times to help him with whatever he needed. That included invitation-only Saturday sessions in which Walsh and the 49ers staff discussed in great detail the players each of them had scouted over the previous week. Walsh controlled the meetings with his probing questions, reminding presenters always to highlight “what the player could do for the 49ers”—that is, how he specifically fit our schemes or needs. Through it all, he took notes on his ubiquitous 3-by-5 cards, leaning my way and whispering instructions whenever he needed supplemental information.

On draft day in 1986, driving through the inky, deserted darkness of El Camino Real, I thought a lot about those Saturday staff meetings and everything I had learned during the frantic three months of nonstop work that led up to the draft that would build a dynasty. I’ve never forgotten the main takeaway from that year. It remains just as relevant and vital more than three decades later. The game of football might be ruled by perfectionists, but at its core, success in the NFL comes down to managing the maddening, inexact science of talent evaluation and team building. And when it comes to predicting human performance on a football field, the only thing for certain is that nothing is ever for certain. Despite the thousands of man-hours and millions of dollars teams invest in the draft every year, a recent study showed, teams still get it wrong on almost half of their top draft picks.

The imperfect nature of team building is why Walsh and all the other great football minds I’ve been around have approached the eternal puzzle of personnel the same way: Instead of trying to “solve” or perfect the draft, they have figured out how to create an edge by developing methods, strategies, and insights—things such as deeper background checks, better character evaluations, and more thorough off-season evaluations—that minimize risks and improve the odds of building a better team. Few mastered these techniques better than Walsh.

That’s why, as I pulled into the San Francisco facility on the morning of the 1986 draft, I was overcome by the strangest feeling in our business: confidence.

—

One of Walsh’s draft mentors was Al Davis himself, whom Walsh had worked for earlier in his career. Having spent time with both legends, I saw firsthand how Davis influenced Walsh’s ideas about team building, especially the importance put on a prospect’s pedigree. Both Davis and Walsh understood that digging deep into a draft pick’s background could be indispensably informative. For one thing, Davis believed that any player who demonstrated rare talent in high school needed to be considered carefully regardless of how he played in college. After all, his prep potential could have been squandered by poor coaching or a mismatch in talent and scheme. Davis believed in this theory so deeply that he carried around a file of old Sunday 
Parade
 magazines so that in free moments he could pore over the tissue-thin pages that listed past 
Parade
 high school All-America teams in hopes of uncovering a forgotten diamond.

In 1985, Walsh had called me into his office to give me one of his special assignments. He wanted me to give the top three receivers in that draft—Al Toon, Eddie Brown, and Jerry Rice—the Davis treatment. Calling high school coaches wouldn’t do. I was to go deep into their backgrounds and talk to teammates, classmates, guidance counselors, girlfriends, ex-girlfriends, and anyone else who could offer insight into those young men. After finally getting to the NFL and what I thought was the big time, I ended up spending almost a month collecting data on high school wideouts. You’d be amazed at how much I was able to scare up.

I did my sleuthing on East Coast time, traveling the King’s Highway in the middle of the night, getting in before 5 
A.M.,
 and working the phones from one of the back meeting rooms. Spiral notebook open before me, I called possible sources, throwing the 49ers name around in hopes that it would loosen lips. More often than not, it did. From guidance counselors and coaches alike, the information flowed. I made and received calls all day long. Each time I hung up, the phone would ring again. I always answered, because I knew that if Walsh had the right information, he would make the right decision. Somewhere in my stuffed notebook I was going to have the right information. A little surprisingly, Brown emerged as the clear local hero. He was revered at Miami High School, eliciting raves from coaches who worked with him and faced him. His athleticism and quickness were awe-inspiring. The Bengals thought so, too. That is why, after the Jets took Toon with the tenth overall pick, they grabbed Brown with the thirteenth, leaving us with Rice. He worked out pretty well, I think we’d all have to agree, but who knows what kind of a name Brown could have made for himself in the NFL if he had dropped into our laps.

Another background area that Davis taught Walsh to care about was track and field experience. Davis was forever on the lookout for 100-meter champions from states he deemed “fast,” such as California, Florida, Lousiana, and Texas. (Impressive times from places such as Minnesota didn’t carry the same weight because Davis assumed they were wind-aided.) Davis, by the way, also was obsessed with shot-putters, discus throwers, and state wrestling champs: athletes who displayed rare balance, great footwork, and explosive power. This scouting “cheat” had led the 49ers to Jeff Stover, the University of Oregon’s Pac-10 shot-put champ, whom Walsh called the most consistent lineman on San Francisco’s 1984 Super Bowl–winning team.

One of my all-time favorite Al Davis stories is also a cautionary tale about the imperfect science of player evaluation. In 1981 Davis selected Texas Tech cornerback Ted Watts with the twenty-first pick. When he finally got to meet Watts, Davis stuck out his hand and said, “Ah, the fastest man in Florida.” To which Teddy replied, “Yeah, thank God that white boy slipped out of the blocks and pulled his hamstring.” Davis was brought up so short that he almost pulled his own hamstring. He had made his pick on false pretenses. That white boy, it turns out, was Cris Collinsworth, who recently was named one of the top 50 Bengals of all time. Watts’s NFL career never made it out of the starting blocks. He started just 22 games with the Raiders.

Walsh’s first toe dip into the track and field pool didn’t go much better. Renaldo Nehemiah, a favorite to win gold in the high hurdles at the 1980 Olympics until the American boycott took away his chance, didn’t even play college football. But his breathtaking athleticism got him several NFL tryouts before the Niners signed him. Walsh tried desperately to mold Nehemiah into a receiver, but it was clear almost immediately that he just didn’t have any instincts on a football field. After three years and only 43 catches, Nehemiah was out of San Francisco and back on the track.

Brown’s stellar high school background and Nehemiah’s mesmerizing physical presence on the track were proof that you can’t judge a prospect on just one or two parameters no matter how incredible he may seem. A proper, successful evaluation has to include dozens of factors, countless hours of film study, and real-time confirmation from as many sets of eyes as possible.

If you ask me, Davis’s most important lesson in scouting was this: Focus on the level of competition. It seems obvious now, but Davis was one of the first to understand the huge variation of talent in college—from program to program and conference to conference—and how not being able to compare apples to apples could severely affect draft evaluations. Davis was drawn to players who were at their best against the best. That was why he (and in turn Walsh and eventually almost the entire NFL) loved all-star games, especially the Senior Bowl. In fact, the Raiders would always begin their draft preparations the same way every year: with the complete scouting and coaching staffs in a room and Davis himself armed with the remote control and videotape of the Senior Bowl.

Senior Bowl week in Alabama offered insight that wasn’t available during any other college visit. For starters, there’s just no place to hide against competition that good. And if a player performed a skill once in such elevated company, coaches assumed that they could get him to replicate that in the pros. We looked at how quickly players learned new techniques and, most of all, how much they improved in the week leading up to the game. If a player could get better in four days, it was a safe bet he would take much bigger strides once he was being tutored full-time in the league.

Davis’s idea about watching players compete against those at the highest level remains the key to effective personnel evaluation. Usually, the NFL teams with the lowest winning percentage in the previous season are given the opportunity to coach at the Senior Bowl (if they haven’t been fired, that is). Just a couple of years ago that was the Dallas Cowboys. One of the players on their team was a young quarterback from Mississippi State. Dak Prescott had a distinguished college career, but questions lingered about his ability to adapt to the pro game, his football intelligence, and his overall skill level. After a week with Prescott at the Senior Bowl, though, the Cowboys had answers and insight on a quarterback prospect that no other NFL team could obtain. Armed with that information, they were able to secure a potential franchise quarterback with a fourth-round pick, the NFL equivalent of winning the Powerball.

I’m pretty sure I know exactly how Al, were he still alive, would feel about America’s Team using his methods to find a marquee quarterback.

—

In 2003 Michael Lewis released 
Moneyball,
 the story of Oakland Athletics general manager Billy Beane’s quest to gain an advantage for his revenue-poor baseball team with an outside-the-box analytical approach. In the book, Lewis explains the biases inherent in traditional baseball scouting. In his latest work, 
The Undoing Project,
 he delves deeper into the systematic biases of human decision making. In particular, he writes about confirmation bias, which holds that the human mind is just plain bad at seeing things it doesn’t expect to see and a bit too eager to see what it wants to. Confirmation bias is absolutely insidious in my field even though it breaks the first rule of scouting: Never begin with the end in mind.

Most of the time we don’t even realize it is occurring. Evaluators get caught up in groupthink, settle on an opinion about a prospect, and then arrange the evidence to support it, sometimes for years. Biases in scouting are the main reason many NFL teams fail to make substantial progress in the standings from one season to the next.

Certain coaches, for instance, have a particular weak spot for players with “football intelligence” and let that overshadow actual talent level. More than a few players have survived in the league by knowing a team’s systems cold even when they lack the physical tools to actually make a play when it matters. I call those guys “bus drivers” because they can master the route to the stadium perfectly but can’t do anything once they’ve arrived. When the game begins, they’re stuck in park and have little effect on the outcome. Bus drivers make me crazy.

It’s not just coaches who get fooled; personnel staffers can be mesmerized by biases as well. Blame the “card player.” During game weeks, pro scouting executives watch practice squaders and other inactive players as they mimic the opposing offense or defense in drills. These scout team players are shown a card for their assignment and then execute it. They play fast because they don’t have to think; they just do. Alas, this is not always an accurate indicator of their worth because it’s assignment-free, pressure-free football, like the touch game you played in the backyard, with routes traced on the back of the quarterback’s hand.

The greatest card player of all time—the man for whom the term was coined in 1991—was John Thornton, a defensive lineman from the University of Cincinnati (not to be confused with the John Thornton who played at West Virginia and later for the Cincinnati Bengals). John Earvin Thornton Jr., a college free agent nose tackle, had a typical-for-those-days nose tackle body—like a Coke machine. He was not an instinctive player, but at 6'3" and 300 pounds he could bull his way forward because he was stronger than almost everyone else. As a member of the Cleveland Browns practice squad, he was supposed to imitate the opposing defensive linemen. In practice he’d glance at the card for his alignment and path, then reenact whatever the card told him to do. Playing off the card, he was incredible and virtually impossible to block. So incredible, in fact, that we activated him off the practice squad. Big mistake. Once the game was live and the chess pieces started moving, Thornton had to think for himself. And when he was forced to rely on instincts and awareness of the scheme, he was far from the force we had hoped for. It was as if he were moving in slow motion, the easiest guy to block on the field. He lasted five games before we released him. But it was worth it, I suppose, because we learned something important about our own biases: Card players and football players are two very different things.

The second destructive form of bias we see all the time in NFL team building is “scouting blinders”: whenever drafted players are kept around long after it has become obvious that the evaluation that got them where they are was dead wrong. Like many crimes, the cover-up is even worse than the initial mistake. When it came to players Al Davis discovered, there was no like, only love, and when he loved, he loved forever. Everyone in the Raiders front office called it “the scholarship.” In 2001 we claimed Chad Slaughter, a 6'8" offensive tackle, from the Jets. (Normally, Davis hated to claim players from other teams because it gave the appearance, accurate or not, that other teams were better than his.) Slaughter was with us from 2001 until 2006, the longest stay he had with any team, but when it was time to redo his deal, I offered the minimum, because that was what he was worth. His agent, though, knew he was one of Al’s favorite finds and held out for more. Smart. I eventually overpaid because, honestly, giving the money away beat having to deal with a belligerent Davis if we lost one of his scholarship players.

In 2014, the Jacksonville Jaguars drafted Central Florida quarterback Blake Bortles in the first round of the draft. He was the prize selection of Jags general manager David Caldwell, his first after being given complete authority to run the team. No matter how Bortles plays, though, Caldwell refuses to view him in a negative light. At this point that’s actually quite an amazing feat. In spite of Bortles’s losing career record, not to mention some of the worst fundamentals I’ve ever seen in a pro quarterback (and, yes, I saw what he did for Jacksonville in 2017; call me unconvinced), Caldwell has had difficulty removing his blinders because he doesn’t want to believe he was wrong. In situations like this, GMs almost always blame coaches rather than players.

Love is blind in most NFL front offices, and the destruction caused by it gets compounded when the object of affection is the leader of the team. You can’t bullshit an NFL locker room. Everybody on every team knows who the good players are, who the bad players are, and who the team’s favorite (a.k.a. untouchable) players are. The best teams force players to prove their value. They don’t give—or save—jobs on the basis of draft status. As a result, when a head coach stands in front of his team and supports a player—quarterback or otherwise—who doesn’t deserve it, the rest of the players are almost assuredly mumbling their doubts under their breath to one another, and this lack of integrity and transparency erodes team chemistry faster than anything else in the game.

The truth is, you aren’t officially an NFL general manager until you’ve made a huge blunder on draft day. It’s just part of the gig. The best GMs just accept a mistake as a bad day at the office and move on. Bill Belichick will be the first to admit he blew it when he blows it, such as the year he selected Boston College defensive tackle Ron Brace in the second round, a pick Belichick calls his worst ever. Being able to talk about his mistakes—in Belichick speak: “I fucked that up”—makes it easier for him to hold honest discussions as a matter of course. And it is those discussions that minimize bad decision making.

Nate Silver’s popular website FiveThirtyEight has calculated the success ratio of every position in every round. Drafting a quarterback in the first two rounds has less than a 50 percent chance of succeeding, and with each round those odds dwindle. Overall, the chances of finding a franchise quarterback in any round is closer to 40 percent. There are few parts of the game in which the public’s perception of expertise and the actual data are further apart than in the NFL draft. Think about that FiveThirtyEight number for a second: With all the manpower and expertise that go into drafting the most critical position in professional sports, the experts still have a hard time beating a coin flip. You can blame a lot of things for why drafting is such an imperfect science, but in my mind, bias in the evaluation process is the biggest culprit. Making matters worse, bias-affected decisions inevitably snowball into a series of poor decisions that can bring down an entire team.

Have you seen 
A Simple Plan
? It’s a movie that is all about how bias can compound an original mistake. Three characters come upon a crashed plane in the woods. Inside, they find a dead pilot and over $4 million. Their “simple plan”—take the money before reporting the crash—begins to unravel almost immediately. And with each new move they make, it falls even further apart. In the end, two of the three are dead and the lone survivor realizes the haul is worthless. Everyone loses. And all because they doubled down instead of cutting their losses.

The same thing happens in football front offices.

A draft-day crash won’t necessarily destroy a team. But sticking to a plan because of that disaster always will.

—

Character assessment is by far the hardest challenge for team builders. More than any other factor, inaccurate character assessment is why draft boards are to this day littered with so many mistakes. That’s never going to change, either, because there are so many variables involved. For starters, let’s be honest, there’s a sliding scale of morality in the NFL (as in every industry), in which the more talented an employee is, the more he can get away with. Each team has its own method for determining the risk/reward ratio for signing or keeping players with questionable character. In New England, for example, Belichick has established such a strong locker room chemistry that he can take risks on players with questionable character because he knows they will be policed by their new teammates.

Just as each team situation is different, there are myriad ways to define character. A player might not be a Boy Scout off the field or have what fans in general deem to be great moral character, but if he has “football” character—he practices hard, knows his assignments, isn’t a disruptive force in the locker room, and plays hurt—that’s far more important even if no one in the NFL would be caught dead admitting it.

Because there are so many factors in assessing player character, it comes down to a case-by-case study. That’s why proper scouting is so expensive and labor-intensive: Character can be assessed only face-to-face. A good example of this is when Belichick and I, representing the Browns, went into the 1996 Scouting Combine in Indianapolis hoping to learn more about two top prospects: Miami linebacker Ray Lewis and Nebraska running back Lawrence Phillips.

We had heard that, despite his lack of height and weight, Lewis was destined to be a star. No one had to train him to find the ball carrier; he knew where to go instinctively, usually a microsecond before anyone else. Lewis was also born to lead, to inspire others. A couple of months earlier, an assistant coach had attended 
Playboy
’s Football All-America weekend at the Biltmore Hotel in Phoenix and come back with a glowing review: “He has an infectious personality that partied hard, played hard, and wants to win at everything he does, including Ping Pong,” this coach wrote. Attending that weekend virtually incognito allowed our coach to examine the players in their most natural moments. Prospects are like the rest of us; when they know someone is judging them, they tend to behave better. Lewis’s unguarded behavior passed every test. When I finally met Lewis at the Combine, he was precisely how the scout had described him in Phoenix: energetic and easy. Because we were the Browns, we had to beg and bribe (with free team swag) college players to come speak to us. But Lewis was happy to talk football and go over game tape, and he remembered the details of every game we watched together.

Phillips, in contrast, had all the physical gifts but a growing and well-documented reputation as a violent, unstable character risk. Still, just as we had confirmed our report on Lewis in person, we needed to see for ourselves and do our due diligence with Phillips. Well, however much enthusiasm Lewis showed in our meetings, Phillips was the exact inverse. He remembered nothing about games; not the name of the play, not the opponents, not even the thoughts behind the game plans. He seemed distracted, almost pissed, about being asked to sit with us and couldn’t have cared less that we had the fourth overall pick.

By the time our face-to-face Combine interviews concluded, Lewis had leaped up our draft board and Phillips had fallen off completely.

Of course, there is no ignoring Lewis’s subsequent connection to two stabbing deaths. In the end, he was convicted only of obstructing justice. I’m not giving him a pass, only the benefit of the doubt. What I know for sure is that, before and since, Lewis has carried himself with dignity, and on the field he was the consummate professional. But I also know enough to know there are no universal truths regarding character, no concrete lists of dos and don’ts, only a long string of independent anecdotes I’ve compiled over the years that confirm the importance of judging character on a player-by-player basis.

I’ll start with one of my favorites: Randy Moss.

I traded for Moss when I was with the Raiders. No one disagreed about Moss the player. He was a consensus once-in-a-generation talent. But when it came to his character, there were many different takes. Some scouts around the league didn’t think he could get along with his teammates; others thought he was a great clubhouse guy. Some thought him selfish; others thought he was team first all the way. Some didn’t even think he was coachable.

In the end, Davis cared about one thing: talent. He believed, in that old-school way of his, that he could handle any player who got out of line. Whether he was right about that or delusional didn’t matter; it allowed us to take chances. During Moss’s first year with us he was one of our hardest and smartest workers and a great teammate. Unfortunately, he got injured before the season was half over. The next season under new head coach and former Raider great Art Shell, a different Moss showed up, one who wasn’t buying what the inexperienced Shell was selling. If Moss respected you, he was all yours. If you lied to him, or tried to con him, or didn’t respect his intelligence, well, you had a problem.

Thinking that Moss had lost a step, Davis was willing to trade him, and when Belichick called from New England in 2007, I told him that Moss was his kind of player and that all the other crap that was being spread about him was just that. Moss may not have been afraid to speak his mind, but I knew that he and Belichick would get along, in part because each would respect the other. In fact, Belichick later called Moss one of the smartest players he has ever coached.

Moss, of course, delivered big-time. In his first year in New England he had 98 catches and 23 touchdowns, averaging more than 15 yards per completion for one of the most prolific offenses in history. His physical gifts were off the charts, but even more remarkable was the way Moss and Belichick became kindred spirits, two football nerds underneath all those rough and torn edges. Anyone who bothers to see past the off-the-field issues knows that despite his rare physical gifts, Moss approached the mental part of the game like an underdog always looking for an edge. He often would come off the field yapping about how an opponent was trying to leverage him one way or another. He noted for quarterbacks and offensive coordinators in real time how defenses were reacting to his moves and dealing with his speed. It was Moss who helped teach Belichick how to see the downfield passing game from a player’s standpoint, how the routes looked on the field in three dimensions, not just as a circle and lines on the blackboard. Moss loved to practice, he loved to engage his teammates, and he loved the game—and that love was infectious. He was quick to help younger players. He quickly won over Belichick and the entire Patriots franchise. Even when his life was a mess, Moss was never sloppy as a player, a pro’s pro.

Most of all, Moss displayed another Belichick staple: mental toughness, which the Patriots define as “doing what is best for the team when it might not be best for you.” To the outside world Moss might have seemed like a basket case, but in Belichick’s universe he had earned the highest compliment possible. In New England, Moss was a “program guy”: someone who works hard, is a supportive teammate, and cares deeply about winning. In other words, someone with football character.

Moss is proof that character is such a key factor in the NFL that scouting now needs to be as much about a prospect’s personality assessment as about his talent on the field. Maybe that means spending more time in the campus police office than the football office or more time at the local pub quizzing the bartenders who serve the players. Finding the real truth about a player’s character can be done only with feet on the ground.

When cornerback Tyrann Mathieu tested positive for synthetic marijuana at LSU, he was removed from the Tigers’ team and many NFL scouts moved him to the do-not-draft board. He went on to become a star for the Arizona Cardinals, a consummate pro who has never missed a game because of off-the-field issues. Many teams decided that his recreational drug use—in college!—defined his character. The Cardinals thought not, and they were proved right.

Another example: LSU’s La’el Collins was a high-round offensive lineman on everybody’s board in 2014. In the week before the draft, his romantic partner, Brittany Mills, was shot and killed in her apartment. When word leaked that Collins might be a suspect, teams were thrown into a panic. I had a great campus source, an auxiliary member of the program—a woman—who called right back to assure me the news was wrong. There was no way Collins could be involved, she said. She was around the players all the time, and she swore that Mills and Collins were no longer an item. This could not be the matter of jealous rage that it was being portrayed as.

With the draft just days away, every team had its security officers trying to learn more. Collins passed a lie detector test, but that wasn’t likely to be enough to keep him in most teams’ plans. On the day of the draft, Collins wasn’t selected. No team decided the reward was worth the risk. A few days later, the Baton Rouge police quietly moved past Collins as a person of interest in the case. In New England we still didn’t feel like we could sign him, but the Cowboys gave him a contract. Smart move. On the field, he’s been nothing but stalwart.

With Mathieu and Collins the system to determine true character worked. With Aaron Hernandez it failed, miserably. When Hernandez was coming out of the University of Florida, there were rumors of some marijuana use and bar fights and documentation of a troubled childhood. But his head coach in Gainesville, Urban Meyer, and the members of Meyer’s staff were staunchly supportive. Turned out Hernandez was good at keeping his secrets. No one on the Patriots staff had any idea how dark his past was before we drafted him or even when we rewarded him with a big contract. Sure, he was a loner who didn’t hang out much with his teammates, but he was smart, knew his assignments, and loved to play. Hernandez was a great tight end, but he was also a murderer and a sociopath who somehow was able to sublimate his violent habits when he was at our football facility. In the Patriots’ offense the tight end is such a key factor that it may have skewed our risk/reward scale, but I’m not looking for any kind of absolution here. (I also don’t know to what extent brain injury contributed to Hernandez’s undoing.) I’m just trying to show how easy it is even for teams that care about character to make big mistakes
.

It’s such a complicated task, in fact, that even an expert like Belichick relies on professional outside help. Bob Troutwine is a Ph.D. based in Kansas City, Missouri, and a cofounder of The Right Profile, creators and administrators of unique physiological profiles that “tap” the heart and mind of prospective players. We liked the TAP—Troutwine Athletic Profile—so much that we made everyone applying for a job in the organization take it.

Don’t confuse the TAP with the Wonderlic, the better-known intelligence test that the NFL administers to potential draftees. The TAP offers more insight into personality, asking questions such as: If you could be an animal, which would you be: A. Cat; B. Dog; C. Lion. The questions are random and maybe a bit off the wall, but they lead to important conclusions about the prospect. And only Troutwine can decode the responses. In fact, one of his favorite tricks is being able to tell if a girlfriend, rather than the player himself, has filled out the test.

In Cleveland, Belichick gave the test to a young man who wanted a job in our personnel department. Troutwine called 10 minutes after we submitted the results for his review. In an excited voice, the normally calm doctor declared in no uncertain terms, “Don’t let that kid out of the building; he will be the best employee you have.” We didn’t even give him a chance to get specific; we just dropped the phone and hired Jim Schwartz, who at the time was a former linebacker and economics major at Georgetown who finished third in his class. Despite a fistful of Wall Street job offers, Schwartz took a job as my college scouting assistant. Today he is one of the top defensive minds in the game.

Whether it’s a coaching prodigy or a Pro Bowl player who ends up in prison, it all comes back to character. And because character issues can resonate so powerfully beyond the locker room, they often involve the entire team, from the public-relations department to the owner, and that complicates matters further. In Cincinnati, for example, owner Mike Brown believes in giving players second (and sometimes third and fourth) chances. As one of the league’s more frugal owners he also likes the idea of getting highly talented players at reduced cost because of character issues. That’s why Marvin Lewis is free to take risks on troubled players such as Oklahoma running back Joe Mixon, who received a one-year suspension in college for punching a woman in the face.

It works both ways with owners, however. When Belichick was in Cleveland, he desperately wanted to draft Warren Sapp with the tenth pick overall in the 1995 draft. I can still hear Belichick raving about Sapp, a dominant college player at Miami. Before the draft, though, NFL assistant director of security Charlie Jackson whispered to Browns owner Art Modell that Sapp had off-the-field issues. Still hoping to secure public financing for a new stadium, the Browns couldn’t afford the public-relations risk. Modell overruled a furious Belichick, who traded Cleveland’s pick for a no-name linebacker. Sapp went on to become a locker room leader in Tampa and one of the greatest defensive players of all time. Eventually, he ended up in northeast Ohio, after all—at the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton.

—

While the rest of the sports world was still catching its breath the day after the Patriots’ dramatic 28–24 win over the Seahawks in Super Bowl XLIX, Bill Belichick already had the next year on his mind. Knowing that special teams coach Scott O’Brien was planning to retire, he asked O’Brien on the plane ride home if he was okay with making the announcement the next day so that the team could begin to move forward. In Belichick’s mind he wasn’t being callous or unsympathetic; 2014 was ancient history, and he was already in planning mode for 2015. Like a Stoic, when Belichick proclaims, “We are on to Cincinnati” or “We are on to next year” or “Scott O’Brien has retired,” he means it.

Whether the Patriots season ends with a Super Bowl parade or a first-round loss, Belichick’s off-season approach to building his next team is always the same and always masterful. Every tactical assumption and roster decision made during the previous season is fair game. No one is grandfathered onto the next year’s team—not for draft status, not for financial commitment. Year after year, roster spots are earned.

When the season ends, the Patriots coaching staff immediately holes up in the offensive team meeting room at Gillette Stadium to begin preparing for the next season. With Belichick and his trusty Mac laptop at the ready, the autopsy begins. Every facet of the organization is probed, examined, and challenged as he looks for ways to improve the team.

Belichick’s off-season team-building meetings are probably better run than most Fortune 500 board meetings. They start with each positional assistant assessing each player in his unit: strong and weak points, relevant medical history, projected role for the upcoming season and beyond. The conversation eventually comes around to developing a plan specifically tailored to help each player get better. Off-season roster planning in New England always includes figuring out how to tweak the ways we teach our lessons. Like his mom and dad before him, at his core Belichick is a teacher and believes strongly in the idea of “taking the lessons from the meeting room to the classroom to the field.”

Hulking defensive tackle Vince Wilfork, for example, never needed to get stronger but did need to lower his body fat, whereas linebacker Rob Ninkovich needed to be stronger and more flexible. When free agent corner Malcolm Butler arrived in New England, he learned the playbook better through one-on-one walk-throughs and independent study time. He needed one-on-one tutoring and special attention, so a plan was created for Butler to spend extra time with the assistant coaches. After two weeks we revisited the situation and realized that Butler learned best from seeing and doing rather than talking, so more time was devoted to on-field practice and less to classroom study. Each player retains information differently, and it’s the coach’s job to determine the best way to instruct him.

Belichick knows coaches tend to define their current problems as having binary solutions: A or B. It’s the simplest way to break down the issues at hand. But though that might work at their level, general managers like Belichick can’t fall into this “false duality” trap. They know there are often more than two solutions to any problem. At the GM’s level the best way to solve a problem is often alternatives C, D, E, and F. Belichick’s staff meetings allow him to push beyond the false duality to those more enlightening alternatives.

Belichick lets the coaches talk first, but invariably he has questions. He’s in search of the right answers, not just any answers, and so he takes the time to listen to many different thoughts and ideas before coming to a conclusion. It’s listening that leads to a clear choice when he is faced with a tough decision. In the end, Belichick is brutal in the decision making regarding his roster: When he knows a player’s financial demands put him out of reach, for example, he instructs the coaches to move on. That player might be the most talented guy on our roster, one who played hurt and is beloved in the locker room, but by the time that meeting’s done he might as well be dead to us. That’s another one of Belichick’s secrets: He can connect emotionally with players as a coach in a way that extracts their very best on the field, but then he can go upstairs, put his GM hat on, and make cold-blooded financial decisions regarding that same player without so much as a second thought. It’s breathtakingly calculating and ruthless.

But it is also based on a wide range of intel. Belichick is not above asking a defensive coach, for instance, about an offensive player. He encourages everyone to have an opinion as long as there is data, insight, or experience to support it. No one dares to operate by the seat of his pants for fear of being called out by the boss. In essence, Belichick’s open and transparent process at the beginning of each off-season helps remove personal biases so that the room can reach clean conclusions on how to spend the rest of the off-season.

The autopsy also covers the more ephemeral aspects of team building, such as attitude, relationships, and chemistry. Today we operate in a world in which millennials dominate the NFL workforce. Brady, in contrast, is old enough to be the dad of some of the young guys in the locker room. He’s a Hall of Famer to you and me but a geezer to some of his teammates. To get his job done, though, he must relate to these kids just as any boss does. Therefore, after 2015, our off-season review included detailed discussions about how to work with millennials: how to reach them and motivate them. I promise you, no other NFL team thinks this way.

Skill without the proper mental state gets you nowhere, and Belichick knows it. Although his wardrobe never changes, Belichick often talks about how each year means a different team makeup. For example, the 2016 team that defeated Atlanta in the Super Bowl was in his words “tough and hardworking.” He had little doubt that they would fight through bad performances, including the first three quarters of that Super Bowl. But his 2009 team, the one that lost to the Ravens in the wild card game? That roster was not nearly as tough. “I just can’t seem to get them to focus,” Belichick confessed to Brady in a walk-through before a game with the Saints. When faced with the same problems in 2014, Belichick solved his toughness problem the same way your high school coach did: by making the team practice in inclement weather. He would yell at his millionaire players, “Forget the elements; get your shit on and get outside,” and if it didn’t necessarily produce the crispest workouts, it did seem to hone their determination. There were so many bad-weather practices with that team that by the end of the season, as soon as it started raining or snowing, players beat him to the punch, yelling to one another: “Get your shit on and get out there.”

Belichick takes all the information from the initial off-season meetings and synthesizes it into three lists—for offense, defense, and special teams—prioritizing the most deficient positions in each unit. Then we spend the rest of the spring and summer fixing those problem spots. When I joined New England in 2014, at the top of the need chart was a single word: 
cornerback
. We had to re-sign Aqib Talib or find his replacement. When we couldn’t make a deal with Talib, Belichick simply moved on to former Jet Darrelle Revis—one more example of how Belichick the emotional coach never sways Belichick the pragmatic GM. All of my conversations with Belichick about Talib centered on the swagger he added to the locker room and how he brought out the best in the other defensive players. Those qualities were essential to our team makeup, and Belichick loved that Talib provided all of them. But love is never blind in the New England front office.

Belichick the general manager knew that the reason he was able to trade for Talib during the season was that the guy had a somewhat checkered past off the field. The risk/reward had been worth it. But not anymore. Not with the concern over his durability. (Talib had missed two of the most important games in his tenure, the 2012 and 2013 AFC championship games, suffering first-quarter injuries in both.) We pivoted to Revis. And that was that. Our contract offer to Talib reflected the new reality of the 2015 season. He signed with Denver, where he won another Super Bowl ring. Did we make the wrong decision? Belichick doesn’t care. That’s ancient history. He coaches with his heart, but he makes personnel decisions with his head and never looks back.

Granted, it wasn’t yet a big-time need, because Brady was still playing at a peerless level, but Belichick believes that the best time to develop a young quarterback is when you already have one. So we were looking for more than talent. We needed someone who would not be intimidated by Brady. We needed mental toughness as well as physical skills. And we found it in a not-obvious person: Jimmy Garoppolo from Eastern Illinois.

How did we land on him? Well, I had just been fired unexpectedly from the Browns, a team in desperate need of a quarterback, and so I had done a tremendous amount of work on all the prospects. I knew this about Garoppolo: He was confident but not cocky; his teammates loved him; he had the work ethic and leadership qualities required for the position; his technique and fundamentals were excellent; and had a superior command of the offense. (Davis might not have liked him because he played at a lower level of competition, but that was the only thing not to like about Jimmy.)

After we brought Garoppolo to Foxborough, we knew he could handle it all. Again, it comes down to an individual assessment of each prospect’s character. He wasn’t going to be disrespectful toward one of the greatest players of all time, but he wasn’t about to back down from the challenge of replacing him, either. We also brought in Johnny Manziel, the Heisman Trophy winner from Texas A&M. Both Manziel and Garoppolo did very well with the predraft routine the Patriots give all their prospects. But Garoppolo was clean off the field, a model player with the right demeanor, whereas Manziel had a few pretty blatant red flags. The choice was obvious.

Every team has a need list. What makes Belichick’s different is that it is a living, changeable document. He revisits it constantly throughout the year, alone and with staff. There is a saying about college recruiting: “It’s like shaving; if you don’t do it every day, you look like a bum.” Walsh believed that a team needed to make at least 10 postdraft moves. (No one knows how he came up with 10 as his magic number, but it would be easy to surmise that he wanted to add one upgrade to each position group except quarterback.) Belichick thinks of NFL team building the same way: as a never-ending process. Needs change as injuries arise and skill levels evolve. To ignore that is to fall behind.

Talk to any team’s representatives over the summer and you’d think their moves had put the Super Bowl in reach. Talk to the Patriots and you might think they were an expansion team—not because they don’t like their talent but because they are never satisfied.

Contentment is the enemy.

—

Okay, I think you’re ready to appreciate the Niners epic 1986 draft.

When I arrived at our offices in those wee hours, 711 Nevada Street was a ghost town, empty besides the caterers. Coffee and my excitement were brewing in equal measure. As soon as Walsh entered the draft room, I handed him Will McDonough’s mock draft from that morning’s 
Boston Globe
. In the days before the Internet, publicly posted mock drafts were a rarity and guys who had the inside scoops to inform them were rarer still. McDonough was one of those guys. Lucky for me, my college roommate, Massachusetts native Paul Brady, had turned me on to McDonough. Luckier still, Paul was an early riser and 
Globe
 subscriber who was eager to report how McDonough thought the first round would unfold. Walsh valued McDonough’s opinion; he knew he was wired around the NFL. The tough South Boston scribe never backed down from a confrontation, just the kind of guy we figured no team would have the guts to flat-out lie to. (Keep their options open? Of course. But lie? No.) A year earlier, in fact, it was McDonough’s intel that gave Walsh a sense of how high we had to move up to get Brown, Toon, or Rice. This is how crazy team building and the NFL draft can be: Even a genius like Walsh depended heavily on a crumpled roll of fax paper from Boston to help him make his selections. To this day I wonder if my buddy Paul realizes what a critical role he and his fax modem played in helping construct the 49ers dynasty.

Walsh had his eye on three players this time around. As the draft wound around to us, he directed me to the blackboard (yes, the blackboard; this was 1986: lots of fax machines, few greaseboards) to write the following names:

Gerald Robinson, DE Auburn

John L. Williams, RB Florida

Ronnie Harmon, RB Iowa

Sitting behind a large desk, Walsh appeared confident that at least one of them would be available when our turn arrived at 18. But drafts are like an open-sea cruise: It’s smooth sailing until—whap!—a huge wave rocks the boat, and just like that you’re navigating the squalls of a storm and taking on water. The first rogue wave landed when we heard the Vikings had selected Robinson with the fourteenth pick. We were prepared for that thanks to the 
Boston Globe
. But it still stung: Our coveted pass rusher was off the board.

We rebounded quickly, knowing that with three picks to go we still had two of our guys available…until Seattle grabbed Williams at 15. Now the oxygen seemed to be sucked out of the room. Walsh pushed back from his desk and instructed our general manager, John McVay, to get on the phone to assess the market for trading down, just in case. McVay had barely begun to dial when—poof!—Buffalo snagged Harmon at 16.

Few moments epitomize the volatile art and science of team building quite like this: After three months of nonstop, backbreaking draft preparation, we were about to be on the clock and our blackboard was empty.

Now Walsh was up and pacing. It was like being in the middle of a busy ER. He barked to McVay that we needed to trade down, if only to buy some time—say, a half hour or at least two or three picks (each team has 15 minutes to make a choice)—to collect our thoughts and come up with a new plan. Right away, Dallas made us an offer to move to 20, but it only got us a fifth rounder. That went against McVay’s own theories about value, but we were reeling a bit and it gave Walsh the cushion of time he needed, which was far more important than the compensation itself. Draft rule corollary: Know the objective of every trade. In this case, time trumped value.

McVay made the deal.

Unfortunately, time alone was not going to solve our problem; truth be told, we had no idea whom to pick. Our highest-rated player was Larry Roberts, a defensive end from Alabama, but McDonough had reported that he’d still be available in the second round. So Walsh asked McVay to move down again, this time as a value play. He told McVay he didn’t even care if we slipped out of the first round altogether. A moment later our prayers were answered: The phone rang; we had an eager partner on the line. The Bills, picking twenty-ninth, were offering their second, third, and tenth rounders. Added bonus: The third-round pick was just in front of the Raiders, so Walsh could beat Davis in their annual draft-day oneupsmanship. We were desperate, but the Bills didn’t know that. We tried to squeeze them for a ninth rounder instead of a tenth, but we were on the clock with zero leverage and were forced to agree to their offer. Everyone exhaled.

We had survived a nightmare scenario in the first round, and now we had extra picks and plenty of time to figure out what to do with them. One of the things that shows how Walsh and Belichick operate on a different level than the rest of the NFL is the way both coaches understand the value of trading down. If everyone in the NFL is missing on nearly half their draft picks, the only way to increase your odds is to make more picks, especially in the second to fourth rounds, where you generally find the best values (cost versus talent). It’s simple math, but it’s amazing how few NFL minds understand it.

After racing through most of the first round, now the clock seemed to stop in our draft room. The wait until our new spot at 29 seemed endless, but we were excited about the prospects we had to consider. Then the Lions called. They absolutely, positively had to have our pick and were willing to give us their own second rounder, number 39, and their third, 66, for it. McVay tried to maintain his game face but pounced on the deal and then, maintaining his momentum, traded our backup quarterback Matt Cavanaugh to the Eagles for another third and a second in the next year’s draft. I don’t know how he kept track of everything, but for good measure McVay then traded our own second rounder to Washington for a first rounder in the next draft and an extra tenth before finally shipping the third-round pick we’d just acquired from the Lions for both of the Rams’ fourth rounders and the rights to backup quarterback Jeff Kemp.

We had been at it for five full hours and had yet to make a single selection, but it was already one of the most successful drafts in 49ers history. Walsh and McVay had secured a new backup quarterback; a first-﻿, second-﻿, and third-round pick in the next year’s draft; and a second, three thirds, three fourths, and a tenth in this year’s draft.

Now all we had to do was make those picks count.

And did we ever.

In the second round, just as the intel from McDonough predicted, we were able to get Roberts, the highest-rated player left on our board. Next up: that third-round “beat Al Davis” choice. Walsh loved fullback Tom Rathman from Nebraska, thinking he would fit perfectly in the Niners’ offense. From predraft conversations with Davis, Walsh knew he was looking at a fullback too, but the Raiders guru never mentioned his favorite by name. We snagged Rathman right before Davis inexplicably broke with his self-imposed level-of-competition standard to select Vance Mueller from tiny Division III Occidental College. A few months later we played the Raiders in the first preseason game, and Mueller ripped a nine-yard run right in front of our bench. Walsh vented wildly into his headset, letting us all know how much he hated the thought of Al getting the better player. But in the end it wasn’t even close. Rathman had a much better career.

Still in the third round, we picked Tim McKyer, a fast and athletic corner from Texas at Arlington with iffy tackling skills. But that didn’t bother Walsh at all. The speed was there, and his deep background check was positive. Plus, Walsh knew our Pro Bowl safety Ronnie Lott would demand physicality from the rookie. (He was right, as usual. McKyer’s toughness earned him a spot on John Madden’s All-Madden Team of gritty players a couple years later.) With our last pick in the third we grabbed John Taylor, a wide receiver from Delaware State. In the fourth, we selected offensive lineman Steve Wallace, injured defensive tackle Kevin Fagan, and Charles Haley. Haley was another “beat Al Davis” pick. Davis loved pass rushers, and Walsh had been teasing him all spring about finding the next great QB killer. We were told Davis had everyone in his personnel department scrambling to uncover the mystery rusher, to no avail.

Each of the players we chose that day would be a longtime contributor to the dynasty Walsh was building. The 1986 Niners draft was a haul most football executives only dream about. We didn’t know that at the time, of course, although we sensed we had done some excellent work. In fact, by the time we took Haley, everyone in the room was ecstatic. Everyone except our college scouting director and my immediate boss, Tony Razzano. Tony hated our draft to that point. For him, the only way to salvage the miserable day was for us to get Patrick Miller, a Florida linebacker, in the fifth round. Miller, though, had tested positive for marijuana at the Combine and had landed on Walsh’s don’t-draft list. Razzano was relentless in his support, however, and eventually Walsh acquiesced. This was the one time all day that we didn’t use all of our tools to minimize risk and improve our odds. As soon as we turned in the card to make the pick official, Walsh pushed his chair back violently and headed for the board that held the names of the defensive back prospects. Fearing Walsh’s rage, everyone scattered but me. (Not because I was brave but because it was my job to stick by his side at all times.)

As I stood there, Walsh stared at the list of free safeties. Head slightly tilted, he read the names in the “make-it-plus” category— that is, players we thought had more than an 80 percent chance to make the team. After a few moments of, I guess, channeling the football gods, Walsh’s left index finger floated across the names like a giant Ouija board until—thwap!—it landed on the card of Don Griffin from Middle Tennessee State.

“What about this kid?” he asked.

I dutifully reported back that he was the Ohio Valley Conference player of the year and that both our scouts who visited the school liked him. But when Walsh actually suggested that we take him in the sixth, a pit formed in my stomach because, truth was, it had been eight months since anyone had seen or spoken to Griffin. (In our defense, this was pre–information age scouting.) I did the only thing I could think of: I raced to the side room, punched in the number we had on file for Griffin, and prayed. After three rings, someone picked up. I informed the person on the other end of the line who I was and what team I worked for as best I could over the party noises in the background. When Griffin came to the phone a moment later and assured me that he was healthy and ready to go, I let out the biggest sigh of relief in my life. Griffin, too, would become a Niner stalwart. Miller, not so much.

What a day. By the time our tenth-round pick came around, we had fully reloaded with more eventual starters than most teams get in two drafts, sometimes three. (And don’t forget, we also had stockpiled three top picks for the following draft.) A relaxed and satisfied Walsh turned his attention to actor and draft obsessive Bradford Dillman, who was in the room with us. Dillman, a Yale grad who starred in the original 
Escape from the Planet of the Apes,
 
The Way We Were,
 and a handful of Dirty Harry movies, had a deep love for the 49ers and over time had worked his way into the inner sanctum of the team. In each of the previous few drafts, Dillman had gone so far as to provide us with his own sleeper pick backed up by a funny but highly detailed analysis of why his player would make 49ers history.

His insight and presence were usually worth a good laugh or two. But at the start of the tenth round, he snapped open his briefcase and pulled out a typed dossier extolling the virtues of Harold Hallman, a defensive tackle from Auburn, who, the report stated, “could get more penetration than Warren Beatty at a sorority party.” After a long, exhausting, and historic day, Walsh just kind of shrugged his shoulders. Hallman would be our final pick of the draft.

He never made the 49ers, but Hallman did go on to become rookie of the year and a four-time all star playing for Calgary and Toronto in the Canadian Football League. That made him just the right final selection in one of the greatest drafts in NFL history. Everything the 49ers touched that year, even our gag pick, turned to gold.

A day that began on a desolate stretch of El Camino Real ended with a clear path back to the Super Bowl.

