# 4

---



4

SPECIAL TEAMS

THE MEANING OF ALL-IN

It’s not the strength of the individual players; it’s the strength of how they function together.

—BILL BELICHICK

As the ball explodes off the right foot of Pittsburgh Steelers punter Mark Royals, the sold-out crowd inside Cleveland Municipal Stadium rises to its feet in a deafening roar, waiting to see what Eric Metcalf will do next.

With just over two minutes to play and the Browns trailing their rivals 23–21, darkness has begun to fall on the rickety old stadium and perhaps the team’s 1993 season. Our defense has given up 26 first downs and more than 400 yards to the Steelers, and our offense has stalled after fading hometown hero Bernie Kosar replaced an injured Vinny Testaverde at quarterback. Most coaches would be out of options at this point. But not Bill Belichick. Everyone else in the NFL tends to dismiss special teams as an afterthought, but Belichick has an unparalleled respect for and commitment to special teams. To Belichick, special teams are the heart and soul of a team, the ideal way to establish culture, chemistry, and toughness and develop the talent of the entire roster. Oh, and just maybe to steal a game from a rival.

So as the punt soars past midfield and Metcalf, the Pro Bowl returner, rocks back and forth in anticipation on his own 25-yard line, I stand expectantly in the tiny coaches’ booth near the roof of the stadium. Wiping the sooty condensation off the windows, I have a bird’s-eye view of the play about to unfold and of Belichick’s special teams’ genius.

Before making his name as a defensive coordinator with the two-time Super Bowl champion New York Giants, Belichick spent several years in the league as a special teams coach. For Belichick, working on special teams was never a dues-paying grind. In fact, his affinity for that part of the game was instilled by the greatest influence of his life: his father, Steve, a renowned scout and coach and an associate professor at the Naval Academy. From the time he was nine, growing up in Annapolis, Bill would spend entire days watching his father conduct practice, scout opponents, and break down film. (Once in a while he even got to play catch with Navy quarterback Roger Staubach, his childhood hero.) Steve Belichick was never well-known to fans, but his football intellect, attention to detail, and ability to teach the game were highly respected by his peers. I really believe that Bill’s deep respect for his father’s career in the shadows and the tone set at the academy—a total, tireless, and selfless commitment to team and something greater than individual accolades and attention—are to this day what power his unique focus and appreciation of special teams.

Special teams led to Belichick’s first job in the NFL. When he was 24 and still answering to “Billy,” he was hired to be the assistant special teams coach of the Detroit Lions under Rick Forzano, a former Navy head coach. Among other things, Forzano and the Belichicks knew full well that the most important job that our military academies do is develop strong-minded soldiers. A study done by Angela Duckworth for her book 
Grit
 found that the factor most predictive of whether a pledge will endure at West Point is mental toughness. No surprise, then, that when Belichick finally became a head coach in Cleveland, he was on the lookout for players with that characteristic, particularly to man his special teams.

From the beginning Belichick has been a master at developing toughness. One of his first acts as head coach was to have a hill built beside the indoor facility in Ohio to hone the players’ bodies and minds alike. Much like the hard-core training for Navy SEAL candidates, the hill was a test of determination. If players can fight past exhaustion, if they can focus when they’re completely drained, well, that’s mental toughness. It’s easier to commit penalties when you’re exhausted and easier to take a play off, too. There was no fooling the hill. (Today in New England, in fact, there are two hills.) The point was always to be able to disqualify players who could not handle the mental challenge before they saw real action and fell short when it mattered. If you can’t make it through the training, you can’t be a SEAL, and if Belichick’s players couldn’t handle the hill, they couldn’t play on Sunday.

Backpedaling into place to receive the punt, it’s clear that Metcalf is limping. A bad knee kept him out of practice until Friday, and truth be told, he probably shouldn’t be playing. But all week long, Belichick has been buoyed by the feeling that the Steelers’ special teams aren’t as strong as ours. Seeing an advantage to exploit and a chance to build the culture of an eventual playoff-caliber team, he’s pushed our special teams units to make big plays and set the physical tone against the Steelers—a challenge Metcalf has answered with an already gritty performance on one healthy leg.

Belichick’s other go-to toughness test was administered on the field: the trial by fire of kick coverage and returns. No other play in football demands that 10 big and fast men—apologies to all the kickers out there—run full speed at and through 10 other big and fast men to tackle a runner. Covering kicks is a show of bravery that eliminates the weak. Watching a player perform that task can answer a couple of questions at once: Does he play with abandon? Does he love to get physical? If the answers were yes, Belichick knew he had a guy with grit who would put his body on the line for the greater good of the team. If you want to determine a player’s mental toughness, ask him to help out on kickoffs and punts. This was one of the many grueling tests we gave newly arrived players in Cleveland. Emphasizing special teams toughness helps instill an “all-in” vibe up and down the roster. That was why Belichick ruled that virtually every player must contribute to the various special team units.

Metcalf was a former number one draft choice. So was Eric Turner. Turner, Belichick’s first pick as Browns head coach, would become an All-Pro safety, but he was precisely the kind of strong, athletic player Belichick loved to see on his special teams. In Cleveland, we became so focused on developing our special teams with that type of talent that our defensive coordinator, Nick Saban, complained about how his side of the ball was always being slighted, forced as it was to incorporate lesser players because they also could help the kicking game.

Before he sent his punt return team onto the field, special teams coach Scott O’Brien made sure his group understood that he wanted them to set up a right sideline return. That means the jammers (blockers) on both ends of the line have to do a great job of blocking the Steelers’ gunners (the punt team’s best cover men and generally the first defenders down-field). Earlier in the game, Metcalf took one back 91 yards for a touchdown with a left sideline return, and O’Brien knows that if Royals makes a tactical mistake and punts down the middle of the field, a right return, the play he called, will be the shortest path to the end zone.

But on the right return the responsibility of jamming the gunners falls to a couple of exhausted defenders, Turner and fellow safety Stevon Moore. Turner and Moore have played their hearts out all day. These stars of the defense are also special teams stalwarts. Being exhausted is no excuse; their teammates need them. In reality, they secretly love the violent chaos of punt return duty. If all goes as planned, Turner will go to the left side of the Steelers line, jam his man, peel off, and race across the field to help set up a “fence” of blockers that will lead Metcalf up the right sideline in front of the Cleveland bench. Moore will align to the right side and jam his man inside toward the middle of the field and then race backward to help seal the sideline for Metcalf.

Belichick has called off any rush of the punter to better set up the return, hoping the extra time causes Royals to relax a bit and overswing on the kick rather than direct it to a sideline. And the tactic works. Royals’s kick is headed exactly where we’d hoped it would go: straight down the middle of the field toward the most explosive talent in the NFL.

Many NFL teams give certain players dispensation to avoid particular team drills, but I’ve never seen that do anything except divide the group into haves and have-nots. That was certainly the case in Oakland. During the 2005 season, I was driving home from Friday practice to have dinner with my family when I got a call from Al Davis. “How could you let them work him so hard?” Davis yelled into the phone. To which I naturally asked, “Who is him?” In his angrier-by-the-second Brooklyn accent, Davis answered simply: “Alvis.” Ah, Alvis Whitted, our fourth wide receiver. My still-flummoxed response: “Do what?” only got him more riled. “Let him run down kickoffs!” he clarified. “We have to save his legs!”

When I pointed out that we needed guys to cover kicks, too, Al followed with his signature “Ah, fuck” and hung up.

Whitted did have incredible speed, but he was the fourth or fifth option at his position—exactly the kind of guy who fills coverage units. We couldn’t exempt him. Here’s what separates the most subtle football thinkers from the rest: They know that special teams account for nearly 20 percent of all plays during a game, and they’re not willing to forgo the chance to gain an advantage over an opponent in one-fifth of the available opportunities. But most coaches (and owners) are happy just to get off the field with clean exchanges—that is, no turnovers. They’re not even overly concerned with field position, because you can turn field position with one deep pass. Davis was one of those guys. He wasn’t interested in risking the health of his starters—and primary backups such as Whitted—on a unit that to him didn’t matter strategically. He certainly wasn’t thinking about building a foundation of teamwork atop the unit. Guys like Belichick, though, believe firmly that an “all-in” culture is an essential piece of the championship equation and that special teams are the fastest path to it.

Davis, in all fairness, loved specialists. He drafted a punter, Ray Guy, and a kicker, Sebastian Janikowski, in the first round, and so it would be hard to knock him for not loving the special teams. He just didn’t love using his “fast” players from the offense to cover kicks. He found his edge in other places. For one thing, he saw the advantages of forcing opponents to field a ball kicked by a left-footed punter, particularly when they’d had no experience at it. Davis understood that the ball comes off a left foot with a different rotation, making it a challenge to catch. Plus, left footers are rare, which means returners don’t have a lot of practice dealing with that rotation. Davis would hire left footers when he could, and he always made sure to bring one in to practice the week before we were set to face one. And now Belichick does that, too.

Another reason for Belichick’s obsession with specials teams is that they allow coaches to interact with more of the team at once. Offensive and defensive coordinators just manage guys in their unit, but the kicking games use players from both sides of the ball. Aside from a full team meeting, the special teams meeting is the largest regular gathering. Sure, most of the players at that meeting are from the back end of the roster, but a second tier that is strong and nourished pushes frontline players as well as any cash bonus or contract incentive.

Belichick isn’t the first coach I saw use special teams to change the broader culture. When Kansas State hired Bill Snyder to be its head coach in 1989, the program was among the worst in college football. Snyder took over a program that had gone 27 games without a win. In the 53 years before his arrival, the Wildcats won 137 games, total. A couple of years earlier I had sat in the stands in Manhattan, Kansas, watching practice as a Niners scout and wondering if anyone could ever have success there. And then Snyder put up 136 W’s in 17 seasons. He won many of those games with a wide-open offense and by taking advantage of the instant upgrades that junior college transfers offered.

But it was from the kicking game that he concocted that all-important, all-in atmosphere. Just recently, Snyder shared with me that he knew going into the project that turning around Kansas State would mean building tough-minded players. He also knew that excelling in the kicking game was something all coaches said they wanted but rarely spent the effort to achieve. That is why Snyder walked the walk from the beginning, devoting as much practice time to that unit as he did to the others. Snyder still boasts about how much time he has spent on the kicking game. There is no magic to any of it; it’s simply a function of the head coach’s level of attention. Snyder once said, “You think about the number of repetitions in the course of a ball game that you get in some aspect of special teams, and it is pretty substantial, so it deserves the time you invest in it.” When Snyder landed in Kansas, he was determined to make starters play on special teams because that was how he was going to create what I call the tornado effect.

All-in teams are in fact a bit like tornadoes: disparate energies that band together into a single destructive force that cuts down everything in its path. The greatest example of this concept is the 1980 U.S. Olympic hockey team. Coach Herb Brooks didn’t collect the best hockey players in America for his squad. Rather, he found the 
right
 players. To help put together the roster, Brooks, a psychology major, gave each prospect a lengthy test in which he was looking for high scores in three areas: open-mindedness, willingness to learn, and coachability. He felt those interrelated qualities would allow him to build a team that could overcome the large talent gap it would confront as college kids playing against the best teams from around the globe.

The Soviets had won every hockey gold since 1964, outscoring opponents 175–44 in international play and crushing the NHL All Stars 6–0 in 1979—with a backup goalie, no less. That Soviet team was the best hockey team in history, but Brooks beat it with a bench full of misfits and maybe the greatest all-in culture ever created. No wonder, then, that Belichick admired the 1980 U.S. Olympic hockey team. He admired it so much that he gave its players access to the most protected inner sanctum in sports: his locker room.

In New England, Belichick invited goalie Jim Craig to tell the Patriots about how he flat-out refused to take Brooks’s famous test. The coach relented, but just before the Winter Games were to begin, he told Craig that he was thinking of starting someone else in net. Craig went nuts, yelling, “Is it because I didn’t take your stupid test?” Brooks answered, “No, it’s because I want the guy back who 
refused
 to take the test!” Craig was losing his fire, and Brooks wanted to ignite it like Lake Placid’s Olympic torch. Craig was a tremendous storyteller, but he spent very little time talking about his legendary 36-save performance against the Russians, one of the greatest Olympic performances of all time. Two minutes into his speech, though, every Browns player saw what Belichick had seen in Craig: a kindred spirit. Just like most of the players in Cleveland, Craig was a special teamer at heart. Instead of talking about himself, he focused on the power of the 1980 team’s all-in nature and the unique collection of teammates that built it. Belichick was trying to build something equally cyclonic in Cleveland, and he wanted his special teams to spur the teamwide storm.

I have been part of four Super Bowl teams, and all were all-in types. There simply has to be a thread of unity running through any successful team, from the best players to the practice squad. I’m not saying they all have to like one another, but there has to at least be some level of mutual respect. So when a head coach like Belichick makes special teams a priority, treating these mostly unknown and underpaid players with the same respect as the All-Pros on offense and defense (and sometimes with more), it’s a powerful message about trust and accountability that resonates with all 53 men in the locker room.

Turner, the big, fast, hard-hitting safety from UCLA, was football and book smart, fully prepared to lead the defense even though he was younger than everyone else on the unit. But he was exceptional in another way, too. From the beginning, he wanted to play on special teams. And he was very good at it. We counted on him to contribute to both of our coverage units, and he elevated them both. If he needed a break, we’d give him one, but at critical points of every game he wanted to be out there, and we were happy to oblige.

All of the best, most competitive players I’ve been around are exactly the same, willing to do whatever it takes. I was at the University of Miami in 1988, working out some Hurricanes on the “Box,” which is basically an electronic timer that clocks a series of drills. This was data solely about athletic skill, not football instinct. The key to Box drills was that they were run on a wood surface for consistency’s sake, and that meant I often found myself conducting workouts on campus basketball courts (a massive highlight for this serious college hoops fan). Even today when I watch games on TV, I think fondly of my Boxing days and all the janitors I pissed off by ripping the gloss off their shiny floors when I pulled up the tape I’d laid down as players’ marks.

Anyway, Michael Irvin, Miami’s star receiver, wasn’t likely to agree to participate, so I had to improvise. When I made my call to set up a workout, I was not 100 percent truthful. You see, I gave Irvin the impression that I was actually Marty Schottenheimer, the head coach of the Browns. Irvin had no reason to doubt me and, without caller ID, no way to check even if he did. But when Irvin arrived at the gym to find a fat low-level Italian, he was like “Uh-uh—no way am I working out for you” before walking over to join a hoops game with some of his football teammates. I still had to work out other players, and as I put them through their paces, I kept noticing Irvin sneaking glances at the Box. He was curious, but more than that he was competitive; he wanted to prove he could test better than anyone else. Before I left that day, Irvin had completed the test. (And yes, his scores were outstanding.)

Irvin accepted the challenge to prove his talent, and that’s not unusual for the great ones. It’s the main reason that creating an all-in team with a buy-in from the stars—even when that means getting them to participate on special teams—isn’t as hard as you might expect. Great competitors want to conquer every challenge, and that is a win-win for the special teams coach, because getting the most talented guys to line up with the kicking units can make them dominant.

If relying on their competitive streak fails, sometimes a piece of clothing may be enough to get the message across. You’d think the modern football professional would be too rich and too adult to fall for typical high school motivational methods. Never. NFL players are still helpless before the power of the T-shirt. To help create the culture he wanted in Cleveland, Belichick gave the special teams a nickname, the Strike Force, and each week rewarded top achievers with a brown shirt that proclaimed “Strike Force Champion” across the chest. The top performer got a leather jacket. From high school to college to the pros, locker rooms don’t change. Sure, NFLers own expensive cars and thick financial portfolios. It doesn’t matter; competitive sorts aren’t about to let the opportunity to snag a free shirt pass. In fact, stars might covet those shirts most of all. Belichick required players to participate on at least one kicking team unit, but by season’s end, even the best players were pushing to be on more, hoping to raise their chances of earning a T-shirt or that prized jacket.

Like a smooth major league center fielder, Metcalf has taken two steps backward, calculating precisely where the ball will drop into his soft hands. His eyes never leave the ball. Instead, he lets his internal clock tell him exactly how close the defenders are getting. To do this he must trust completely that his teammates will protect him. The other key, he knows, is the first five yards of the return. If he can get a clean takeoff, Metcalf has an excellent chance to gobble up some major yardage. Turner and Stevon Moore, along with fellow defensive backs Stacey Hairston and Terry Taylor, have done the dirty work, battling the Steelers’ gunners tooth and nail on the line, preventing them from getting a clean, quick path down the field.

Metcalf catches the ball on the Browns’ 25-yard line and takes two quick decoy steps straight up the center of the field. It’s a gutsy game of chicken meant to draw tacklers away from the “right return” coming together on the edge. Metcalf hopes that the rest of the unit can stand tall and hold back the onslaught of tacklers.

The Strike Force comes through.

All around Metcalf is a barrage of human projectiles colliding in a kaleidoscope of brown and yellow jerseys. Bodies fly by in all directions at maximum velocity. The violence of a punt return is breathtaking, really. Everywhere you look players are putting their bodies—and their livelihood—on the line to protect or destroy the returner. You can’t force players to do this; they have to want to do it for one another. Moore even doubles back to race 50 yards downfield just in time to make a perfect diving—and legal—block that springs Metcalf toward the safety of the sidelines and the protection of his blockers, including 295-pound defensive tackle James Jones.

That Moore and Jones were perfectly positioned to help spring Metcalf’s return was no coincidence. Rather, it was a by-product of years of careful game planning and roster building by our staff.

My first job in football was as a volunteer coach at the University of Nevada–Las Vegas, in charge of making coffee for head coach Harvey Hyde. (I was also car washer, fill-up-the-gas-tank guy, and errand boy.) The job was neither glamorous nor high-paying, but it was a start. After my two successful seasons as barista in chief, a young coach from the University of Wisconsin–Superior drove his shiny new Corvette into town, looking for something to do while his wife attended graduate school. That coach was Scott O’Brien.

O’Brien and I quickly formed a football friendship that became a lifelong relationship. (It didn’t hurt that he soon replaced me as official coffee maker, although I always thought he skimped a bit on the grounds.) He had been on the Packers’ practice squad, on the defensive line, but he loved special teams. I mean, he really loved them. Some aspiring coaches are forever drawing plays on scraps of paper. Hell, if someone had snatched any of my notebooks in college, they would have had no luck finding the daily lessons amid the pages and pages of play diagrams. (Did I mention that I was an awful student?) Similarly, O’Brien’s journals featured alley returns for kickoffs and attacking schemes for punt blocks and ways to check into the best return on kickoffs no matter where the opponent kicked the ball. He had an excellent understanding of schemes and what players needed to do to make those schemes work. He was special teams 24/7 and couldn’t wait to teach what he knew, which was quite a bit.

After I left UNLV for the 49ers, O’Brien and I kept in close touch. His career took him to Rice, then to the University of Pittsburgh, where the head coach was another good friend, Mike Gottfried. (Naturally, when he was looking for a special teams coach, I told him to interview O’Brien.) By the time O’Brien was in Pittsburgh, I was close by in Cleveland, so we saw each other more frequently, and when the Browns hired longtime NFL defensive coordinator Bud Carson as head coach in 1989, I saw my chance to get O’Brien to Cleveland. I had no prior relationship with Carson, so I knew it would be a hard sell. Deciding I’d take the same tack that worked with Gottfried—just meet the guy—I marched into Carson’s office. I wasn’t four sentences in when Carson said, “What the fuck would I want with some college guy coaching my special teams?” Two years later I got a second chance when Belichick replaced Carson. Belichick and I had no prior relationship, either, but this time when I talked up my friend, I had an interested audience.

A few days later O’Brien arrived at the Berea, Ohio, training facility. Belichick, dressed in a coat and tie, immediately escorted him into his office. Every so often I peeked down the hall to see if the door had opened, but…nothing. Two hours went by, then three, then four. Finally, after six hours of nonstop nerding out about special teams, Belichick walked down to my office to thank me for the recommendation. O’Brien got the job.

On top of being a great special teams coach, O’Brien was a great talent evaluator. A few years into the job, he made a particularly astute recommendation. When our punter’s leg began to age out, we went shopping for a replacement. O’Brien wanted us to sign Tom Tupa, a local kid from Brecksville, Ohio. Tupa had been a great punter at Ohio State, but he also had been a decent quarterback and the Phoenix Cardinals chose him in the third round in 1988 to fill that higher-profile position. In his first six years in the NFL, Tupa punted just six times, and when he was released (by the Colts), we brought him to camp as our backup quarterback. He didn’t make the team and ended up sitting out the 1993 season. But while he was around for those few weeks of camp, O’Brien urged him to get back to punting. The next season, his booming leg and the bonus of a viable passing dimension as a holder of kicks made him a vital piece of the team. It was the first year of the two-point conversion, and naturally, Tupa was the first to score one. Soon, he was “Tommy Two Point” around the office.

The kicking game allows teams to improve their overall talent level without having to navigate the usual intraleague competition for available players. The NFL procurement system is designed to favor the losers, as poor records earn higher draft positions. But in the draft, those teams are looking for immediate help, players who can make an offense or defense better 
now
. What they are not looking for are players whose skill sets can be honed over time on special teams. This lack of interest in that kind of player creates a variance in the market for those looking for, well, let’s just call it “special” talent.

O’Brien’s ability to find these hidden gems was so uncanny that we built a whole strategy around it. We believed that if a player was a standout in the kicking game, he had a good chance of developing into an effective four-down player (assuming he was smart enough to learn the relevant playbook). And the more four-down players we accumulated, the better we would be. Take Stevon Moore, for example. His trajectory illustrates a best-case scenario in Belichick’s universe. Moore had been a free agent, most recently with Miami. As he did with every potential pickup, O’Brien graded him according to how many kicking teams he thought he could contribute to. Meanwhile, the position coach graded him on strictly defensive criteria. Then Belichick and I assigned a grade that was based on projected overall contribution for the upcoming season and the one after. We also built a specific plan for growing Moore into a four-down guy, which included one of O’Brien’s assistants, Kevin Spencer, teaching him—along with a promising group of 10 or 12 others—the rest of the playbook. Moore eventually was a starting strong safety for us, but he never stopped being an excellent special teams player.

We had to coach up Moore to make him the player he would become, but we never had any doubt that he was a Belichick player. Most of them scream out to you the moment you lay eyes on them. In the spring before our first draft together in 1991, Belichick and I did a one-day, three-city tour of Iowa, kind of like we were on the campaign trail for the state’s caucus. We were coming mainly for Iowa’s star running back Nick Bell. Bell was a big man—not just for a running back but for any position. The problem was, he never played as big or as tough as his size. We had an internal disagreement in the scouting department over his value and role, and this trip was meant to decide whether he would make our final draft board. When we touched down in Iowa City, we learned that Bell was not too interested in working out for us; he especially didn’t want to be timed in the 40-yard dash.

Throughout my career, I’ve found that most prospects are willing to do skill work and strength work but hate the 40, not least because they know that a bad time can offset every good time in their file. We didn’t need to time Bell—his athleticism was not an issue for us—but his lack of desire to run was telling. Unfortunately for him, it also gave us more time to interview him and assess his competitiveness.

Leaving Iowa City, we headed north, and as I drove along Highway 380, we talked about what we had just learned: (1) Bell was neither particularly physically or mentally tough, so (2) he wasn’t a good fit for our special teams. Before our car pulled into a parking spot near the University of Northern Iowa’s indoor stadium, it was decided: We would not be drafting Nick Bell.

We had only one player to work out in Cedar Rapids. That was James Jones, who—his agent Jack Worth kept telling me—was going to be the steal of the draft. Worth was selling his client, sure, but he was a good judge of talent. He scouted players himself, attending games and handpicking his client base. We were already a little intrigued; Jones was excellent on tape, dominating the competition and playing with intensity. But we needed to project his skill set to the next level. Could he play that way against pros? The workout would give us clues. As we entered the football office to meet Jones, he was waiting for us in the small reception area. A good sign. We followed Jones down to the field, where I set up our usual preworkout drill: four large circular bags laid on the ground for players to maneuver over and between. It loosens them up for the rest of the workout while allowing us to judge their quickness, balance, and athleticism. A Belichick workout never began without the bags.

Jones killed in all the drills, from the bags to position-specific tests. During those workouts, Belichick is particularly interested in a prospect’s power. We set up two cones five yards apart. Then, from a two-point stance, the player follows Belichick as he walks from one cone to the other. At some point Belichick turns parallel to the player, at which point the player is supposed to punch the coach’s chest and keep moving. This tight jab gives Belichick an idea of the prospect’s quick-strike force—and often sore ribs. On this day, Jones was Mike Tyson, delivering a blow that I thought was going to earn an eight count. When the workout was over, the guy was on our draft board and Belichick was walking a little hunched over. We drafted Jones in the third round in 1991, and he immediately became a four-down player and a hero, I suppose, to everyone in football who has ever fantasized about hitting Belichick really, really hard.

Jones clears the way for Metcalf to get to the sidelines before lugging his nearly 300-pound frame upfield to find someone else to pancake. As the return is developing, Steelers linebacker Reggie Barnes has the best shot at Metcalf. But the returner’s elite speed catapults him out of reach. The interaction lasts for only a fraction of a second, but it is a definitive justification of Belichick’s singular approach to special teams: Metcalf is a former first-round pick surrounded by blockers who double as starters, but the one guy the Steelers have asked to prevent the game-winning touchdown is Barnes, an undrafted rookie free agent thrown onto special teams as an afterthought, who takes a sloppy tackling angle and comes up with nothing but air.

At midfield, Metcalf cuts inside, allowing the Browns to plow a few Steelers halfway onto the Cleveland bench. Out of nowhere and maybe trying to make up for his poorly aimed punt, Royals appears in front of Metcalf. That’s when he is atomized by Jones. Somehow, Jones stays on his feet and manages to stiff-arm Steelers tight end Tim Jorden (yet another undrafted rookie free agent) before he can get a clean shot at Metcalf. At the 15, one last Steeler backup dives for Metcalf’s legs, but he is chopped down by Taylor, who has covered nearly 115 yards and blocked four different tacklers in less than 10 seconds.

Metcalf high-steps his way through the end zone, stopped by the only thing that has been able to accomplish that in the game: the bursting barricades of the infamous Cleveland Dawg Pound, its boisterous celebration seemingly slingshotting Metcalf back into the end zone, where he’s mobbed by teammates. To make this moment even more perfect—for me at least—the stadium speakers blast Springsteen’s “Born to Run.”

