# 6

---



6

DEFENSE

WHERE SIMPLICITY IS COMPLEX

Times were simpler, defenses didn’t move as fast, and the quarterback was often the best athlete. Now he’s being chased by the best athletes.

—BILL WALSH 

You know that game people play where they name their dream dinner companions? In the spring of 2016, I actually got to live one of mine. Before the draft that year, Bill Belichick and I traveled to the University of Alabama to evaluate the school’s talent at its annual Pro Day. There we also caught up with Nick Saban, a friend of mine, who was the defensive coordinator on the Cleveland Browns staff and a friend of Bill’s even before that. When the Crimson Tide’s Pro Day was over, the three of us headed to Saban’s house near campus for dinner and conversation about—what else?—football. Whenever I finish a lengthy phone call with Belichick, my wife, Millie, always asks me, “Do you two talk about anything other than football?” The answer, of course, is no. Hey, you talk about what you love, and we love football. The only other person I know who loves to chat about the gridiron as much as we do is Saban. As we left campus, he informed us that his wife, Ms. Terry, was not going to be home. That meant the three of us football nerds didn’t even have to pretend to be interested in anything but ball.

We practically raced to Saban’s house. It was going to be a real man-cave dinner with a single course: defense.

Imagine my luck that evening: being a fly on the wall at a long and uninterrupted dinner with perhaps the two greatest football coaches in history, men who have enjoyed a long, symbiotic, and successful history of pushing and challenging each other to perfect their sometimes disparate defensive styles and philosophies.

Even before they were together in Cleveland, Belichick and Saban would meet at West Point or at points along the road to discuss different ways to create the all-important pass rush. Saban and Belichick agreed that pressuring the quarterback was the best way to slow down any aerial attack in the pass-happy era. They just didn’t quite agree on how to accomplish it. On this matter, Belichick offered a staunch conservative counterpoint to Saban’s screamingly liberal all-out-pressure-on-every-down-and-from-everywhere approach. But each saw the merits of the other’s position, and ultimately neither was above borrowing a little from the other and blending it into his own philosophy.

When they reconnected for dinner in Alabama, the timing couldn’t have been better. Saban had just defeated the high-powered Clemson offense for the national championship, although the Tigers, led by Deshaun Watson, put 40 points on the famed Crimson Tide defense. It sounds incredible, but despite the win Saban was still fuming over that defensive performance. As I said, sometimes these guys seem like twins. For both of them, their moods are never a reflection of the score—it’s about the execution. And Saban is far too savvy to pretend that his team wasn’t lucky to prevail.

Clemson ran over and through Saban’s defense by using the spread attack that has been popular in the college game for some time. What made the dinner conversation so intriguing to Belichick was that the up-tempo spread was becoming increasingly commonplace in the NFL as well, ever since Chip Kelly, late of the Oregon Ducks, had brought his version to the Philadelphia Eagles a few years earlier. Belichick could not have cared less about the menu that night or Saban’s spectacular home. He wanted to pick Nick’s brain about stopping the game’s newest offensive wrinkle.

The NFL has a version of the run-pass option: Two plays are called in the huddle—one run, one pass—and the quarterback determines which to go with once he gets to the line and peruses the defensive formation. In college, though, the run-pass option adds a wrinkle, the spread formations from which teams either hand off the ball or fake the handoff and throw a pass. They can do this because unlike in the NFL, college offensive linemen can be as much as three yards downfield, which means they can always block as if for a run play—regardless of whether the offense ends up throwing a pass. In professional football, it’s illegal for linemen to be so far downfield, and anyway, most, if not all, teams would be reluctant to run the option this way for fear of getting their quarterback clobbered.

Nevertheless, Belichick was eager to understand how Saban planned his counterattack. Between bites, Saban went into all of it in depth. Trying not to sound like too much of a fanboy, I have to say that his discourse was amazing: not just the scheme but the way he could make even the most complicated pieces of this puzzle seem simple and easy to digest. Belichick wasn’t particularly interested in the micro, the countless adjustments to each of the calls. What he wanted to hear more about was Saban’s broad philosophy. Belichick would figure out the particulars himself.

That was how they always did things when they worked together.

In 1991, when Belichick became the head coach in Cleveland, he inherited a team that allowed 462 points (28.8 points per game). In just one year, he and Saban dropped that number to 298. And in 1994, the last time Cleveland won a playoff game, the Belichick/Saban defense gave up just 204 points (12.7 per game). They did it with a defense they invented called Red 2.

Red 2, which is often credited to Saban but was truthfully a joint creation, was a “match coverage.” Depending on the pass routes, receivers would be defended man to man or passed off as they crossed into and through different areas of the field. Essentially, it was football’s version of a matchup zone in basketball, and it was used mainly when football offenses were in the red zone. It had different rules and guiding principles than a typical Cover 2 because it defended a more contracted space, and it was hard for the players to understand at first. In fact, my colleagues got sick of me walking around the office saying that learning Red 2 could double as the entrance exam for Harvard. But before long it became clear that Red 2 was a keeper.

In the Red 2, a corner was responsible for carrying a receiver for a distance before passing him to a safety and waiting for another receiver to enter his area and become his responsibility. What made the Red 2 so hard to learn—but nearly impossible to game-plan against—was that each week it could be tailored specifically to the opponent’s passing designs. One week the corner might carry a receiver for 10 yards through his “zone,” and the next week he might cover him for just 8. Depending on any number of factors—matchups, scores, personnel, speed, injuries—the parameters could and often would change. It was taxing on the brain but very effective on the field.

That night he boiled it down for us to a single tenet: More than anything, the goal was to make sure that the “run force” player (the defender who “forced” a rushing play in a certain direction) was never compromised. Setting an edge to contain an outside run and redirecting it inside toward the teeth of the defense had to be that defender’s primary focus, so much so that he needed to be free of the responsibility of handling pass plays, too. Whatever adjustments or sacrifices needed to occur in coverage schemes to make that happen, well, they just had to get done.

Between courses, Belichick peppered Saban with so many questions—“If they double your defensive end, then what?” and “What do you do if the quarterback steps up in the pocket?” and “Could a screen work if you threw it over the end?”—that we were dishing out dessert before I knew it.

Looking back, my dream dinner had little to do with the food and everything to do with the high-level theoretical conversation. The meal was tasty, yes, but the seminar offered by two of the greatest football minds ever was much more filling and fulfilling
.

And it inspired me to create my own philosophy about the 11 essential rules of good defense.

Bon appetit.

1. THE DISGUISE IS AS IMPORTANT AS THE DEFENSE

In the movie 
The Usual Suspects,
 the small-time con artist with cerebral palsy, Roger “Verbal” Kint, regales U.S. customs agent Dave Kujan with tales of an elaborate heist scheme and a mysterious man named Keyser Söze. Verbal’s grand story about the villainous, enigmatic Söze includes one of the most classic movie quotes of all time: “The greatest trick the Devil ever pulled was convincing the world he didn’t exist” (which—fun fact—is actually a rephrasing of a line from the nineteenth-century French poet Charles Baudelaire).

When it comes to disguising defenses, Belichick is the NFL’s version of Keyser Söze, without the murderous impulses, of course. At his peak as a defensive coordinator in the mid-1980s, with everyone watching and trying to reverse engineer his schemes, the tight-lipped Belichick convinced everyone that the New York Giants’ defense was nothing more than a 3-4 Cover 2, with no complexity to it. He convinced the football world that the important wrinkles in his attack didn’t exist by aligning in the same front and showing the same coverage look on every play. Most teams vary their fronts and coverage shells on first and second down to confuse the opposing quarterback. Not Belichick. He brings a level of confusion and disguise 
after
 every snap that keeps most quarterbacks up at night.

Belichick kept up the Keyser Söze act even with his friends and colleagues. When I asked about disguising his defense in 1991, he told me that, in fact, the 3-4 Cover 2 was his only call. He wasn’t lying, but in what some might consider classic Belichick fashion, he wasn’t being entirely truthful, either. Yes, the call was 3-4 Cover 2, but what the defense did out of it depended on the strengths and weaknesses of the particular opponent, not just from week to week but from play to play. For example, just before the snap on an obvious passing down in Belichick’s base 3-4, it might look like the outside linebacker was lined up to rush the edge, but a split second after the snap Belichick would drop the outside backer into coverage and blitz the inside backer through the interior line—all because the last-second switch created a better matchup with a lesser blocker. On the next play, he might slant his entire defensive front to the strong side to combat a strong side run team. The layers of complexities were subtle and the modifications slight, but they allowed Belichick to use what seemed like 35 custom defenses in a single game, which shifted the tactical advantage to his team’s side. Anyone who wanted to believe the tweaks didn’t exist was making a huge mistake, just like the saps in 
The Usual Suspects
.

Belichick’s simplicity-first ruse on defense was inspired by Washington Redskins Hall of Fame head coach Joe Gibbs. Gibbs was a masterful offensive tactician, with a scheme that featured a power running game that won three Super Bowls under three different quarterbacks, none of whom are household names. (Think about that next time you’re engaged in one of those best-football-coaches-of-all-time debates.) His offense appeared complex on first glance, but when Belichick broke it down, he found that it all could be reduced to 13 base plays (3 runs, 10 passes). Gibbs believed, as Belichick does, that repetition breeds execution. All those basic Redskins plays, however, were executed out of (and disguised by) myriad formations, looks, shifts, and personnel groupings that turned 13 vanilla plays into 130 complicated and mysterious plays. For the quarterback, though, no matter what went on before the snap, by the time he dropped back to pass, all the routes in front of him looked just like they always did. Similarly, by the time the ball was in the running back’s hands, the blocking scheme and running lanes before him looked exactly the same. Gibb’s playbook had 13 pages. Everything else was window dressing used to keep defenses in the dark and on their heels, constantly worried that the devil they didn’t think existed was actually playing tricks on them.

Before he became a head coach, remember, Belichick competed against Gibbs twice a year as the Giants’ defensive coordinator, and what he saw in that camouflaged offense had a major impact on him. On his first day as a head coach, in fact, Belichick walked into the Browns’ headquarters and declared that we would adopt the Skins model: core plays disguised with various looks and personnel groups to create confusion.

New plays don’t win consistently, he preached; using old plays in new ways does.

2. STUDYING AN OFFENSE IS THE FIRST STEP TOWARD STOPPING IT

Battles on the gridiron are much like battles on a chessboard. In each case, grandmasters know their opponent’s tendencies and spend time studying games played in styles reminiscent of their own. When Belichick sits down to study an offense, he doesn’t read the press clippings or fixate on the win-loss record. Instead, he watches tape of teams that play a scheme similar to his own base scheme to learn how his upcoming opponent attacked it. Knowing the opponent’s offensive or defensive coordinator is critical, too, so he maintains a thick file on all the men holding those jobs. The more he knows about them, the better he can anticipate what they’ll do in key game situations. When Belichick arrived in Cleveland and I was the pro personnel advance man, we would meet each week to discuss the next opponent, and those meetings began with a debrief about the coordinators. From background to football influences and finally to recent games, he wanted to know as much about the coaches as he did the players because, like chess champion Bobby Fischer, he wanted to know how he was going to be attacked.

The movie 
A Beautiful Mind
 was based on the life of another troubled genius, John Nash, the renowned mathematician who made fundamental contributions to game theory and the study of partial differential equations. (Yeah, me neither.) In the film, Nash’s office shows a desk covered with papers and drawings and a blackboard filled with all sorts of equations and no more room to write. Maybe all geniuses think and work alike, but I swear, Belichick’s office looks just like Nash’s. The coach’s conference table was always covered in stacks of paper—or as we all called them, “the pads.” The pads are Belichick’s version of Warren Buffett’s massive in-depth preinvestment research, the due diligence required to make a correct evaluation of a company, though in this case the company is an opposing team. To “own” an offense, first you have to know how it works. But incredibly, most teams misidentify what opponents do best because they don’t spend enough time studying them.

Every week defensive coaches around the NFL talk about “stopping the run.” But which run? From what formation and toward what direction? And even if you do go deep enough with your analysis, that’s only half the work. Now you have figure out the right way to counter. Say they love to run left. Do you match your primary run defender against their best blocker—like against like—or do you try to free him? Nor is the answer to simply show an eight-man front. If that idea worked all the time, no team would ever gain a yard on the ground. In fact, general solutions often create more problems. No, it’s never as simple as “stop the run.”

The pads all over Belichick’s cluttered office were his defense against this kind of fatal flaw. Essentially, they were plays from game tape printed out on an 8½-by-11 sheet of paper with the precise movements of each member of the offense and defense delineated. And when I say precise, I mean precise. “Padding” the games was a job for young wannabe coaches. It took at least four or five hours to do a game, to make sure Belichick would have the exact details he needed in front of him. The notes on each play went far beyond just basic X’s and O’s. For starters, Belichick wants to know how, when, where, and why every player on the field moved during every play. He wants to know, for example, if there is a variation of even a couple of inches in the offensive line’s splits or if the quarterback likes to throw to his right or is especially deadly on out patterns.

Josh McDaniels, the Patriots offensive coordinator, began his coaching career padding games. After handing over the first few, he got them returned with color-coded Post-its highlighting his various mistakes and omissions. Belichick takes great pride and pleasure in helping and developing young assistants, and with McDaniels he had basically graded his work, adding colored lines to indicate more accurately the movement of the play on both sides of the ball and entering a host of extra data. McDaniels is a proud and competitive man. It didn’t take long until he was padding a game in under four hours, fully confident that there would be no boomerang Post-it notes.

Belichick believes that coaches who learn their craft by padding games are much better coaches on Sunday, even though the task is so labor-intensive that it basically requires them to go without sleep. It’s exhausting work, and Belichick knows it because he often padded games himself. But to him, learning every detail of how an offense plans to attack is far more valuable than rest.

3. DON’T COACH DEFENSE, TEACH IT

“In a very real way,” Bill Walsh once wrote, “everything I did was teaching in some manner or other.” The truth is that at their core all good coaches are great teachers and communicators. The trait ran deep in Belichick’s family. His mom, Jeannette, was a teacher who spoke seven languages and had a lifetime subscription to 
The New Yorker.
 Lou Holtz, the former Notre Dame head coach, often asked his assistants, “Are you a schemer or a teacher?” He wanted to know if they were more interested in doodling plays or teaching teams how to win. Blackboard coaching is a killer. Schemes drawn up in classrooms are undefeated; whoever has the chalk last wins. On blackboards across the league there are elaborate defenses being created that, in two dimensions at least, seem certain to shut down any offense. In real life? Doodles usually don’t translate. But teaching always does.

Sometimes that’s because although they might look incredible, what the play diagrams represent on the field isn’t so smart at all. Or, worse, players can’t properly execute what the doodle demands. But more often than not, the problem is that players don’t understand what they’re being asked to do. And that’s the fault of the coach, not the doodles. When the TV cameras cut to a coach on a sideline after his defense has just allowed a big play, even amateur lip-readers can see the frustrated man saying some version of “What are we doing?” We can’t hear the response, obviously, but honestly, it doesn’t matter. If the coach is asking that question, it’s probably because in some ways the players were, too. If someone has been left wide open, it’s because the players didn’t know what they were doing, and that happened because the coaches didn’t help them understand their responsibilities when they had the chance.

George Seifert, Walsh’s defensive coordinator with the Niners before becoming his successor, was a brilliant assistant: innovative, creative, and not intimidated by a West Coast offense his unit had to face every day in practice. What really set him apart as a coordinator, though, was his teaching skills. Seifert knew how to transfer what was in those elaborate schemes he drew up—the concepts, the assignments, the visual keys, and even the physical requirements—into execution on the field by his players, much to the chagrin of the crusty scouts on the payroll. Those old-timers often complained to me that Seifert’s playbook was too big and too hard to learn and that defense was a reactionary game, not a thinking game. Seifert proved them wrong year in and year out. He didn’t just draw a doodle of a race car; he knew how to build it and how to teach people to drive it. He knew how to implement his schemes.

In Cleveland, our defensive backfield coach—and later defensive coordinator—was a great teacher named Rick Venturi. Over the years Venturi had mastered the extremely complicated Red 2 scheme from top to bottom and even added his own variations and twists to it. But Venturi’s real genius lay in knowing the defense so well that he understood its one shortcoming: It was really difficult to teach. He often warned young members of his staff that “learning Red 2 is not natural for the players; it’s hard to understand and harder to perform.” Not everyone was ready to learn or even play match coverage, and even fewer of us were ready to teach it. How well we taught our players was going to make the difference between success and failure. Venturi knew that just because something like “handing off receivers” looked great on the blackboard, that didn’t mean it would necessarily look great on the field. What Venturi taught us all in Cleveland is that the greatest scheme in the world is only as good as the coaches teaching it.

4. MAKE THE OFFENSE PLAY LEFT-HANDED

This is a classic Belichick tactic: taking offenses out of their comfort zones by preventing them from doing what they do best. Former longtime NFL offensive coordinator Jim Shofner, who was the interim head coach of the Browns before Belichick, described what his successor did as “making you play left-handed.” Of course, everyone in the game is trying to do this. But what makes Belichick different, what makes him worthy of Shofner’s catchphrase, is the way he commits to his plan.

Take the way the Patriots played the Colts with Peyton Manning under center, running back Edgerrin James, and receivers Reggie Wayne and Marvin Harrison. That’s some offensive firepower, but after padding a few of the Colts games, Belichick learned that he could neutralize that explosiveness by setting a hard edge to keep James from getting around the corner and up the field. Belichick game-planned to set that edge no matter what; even if he had to commit two extra players and run the rest of his scheme with nine defenders, he would do it. And if Manning hit a few long passes or if the Colts gashed the middle of the defense for back-to-back first downs, so be it. Most coaches, of course, would instantly abandon their edge-first scheme at the first sign of weakness, but not Belichick.

If the Colts had ever discovered the discipline to ditch the outside running game and just blast away on the inside instead, the Patriots would have been in big trouble all those years. Because he knew Manning and the Colts almost better than they knew themselves, though, Belichick counted on them growing bored with an inside run game. So the Patriots would double Harrison, use their best corner to contain Wayne, and wait for Manning to force the ball into double coverage. All that study and Belichick’s brilliant mind led to a game plan with one goal: take away what the Colts do best, and force other players to step up. That’s making them play left-handed. (Belichick’s overall record against the Manning-led Colts? 12–8.)

Belichick takes away what the opposing team does best, but he also takes away what specific players do best. It’s a subtle but crucial difference. He personally breaks down every offensive player to understand his strengths within his team’s scheme. Then he moves around his defense’s talents to best serve the system he has created for the week. Most teams put their best corner on the best receiver. Naturally, Belichick does the opposite. As he did with the Colts, he doubles the best receiver with his second and third corners so that he can line up his best corner against the second-best receiver and create two matchup advantages. Similarly, Belichick doesn’t see All-Pro Atlanta receiver Julio Jones as a classic Z receiver; he sees him as the one man the defense needs to stop. When the Falcons have to make a play, wise men expect the ball to go to Jones. Belichick is a wise man. Hence the double coverage on Jones. Take away the player who can hurt you, force Matt Ryan to find someone else, and the Falcons are playing left-handed.

Say the opponent is an excellent running team, which the folks watching at home know because the announcers have thrown the “relevant” stats at them: 
Team X is third in the NFL in rushing.
 But that fact means nothing to Belichick. He wants to know where they gain those yards. Off right tackle? Over the left guard? Once he has isolated the player who triggers an offense’s tendencies, he can put his best run-down player, for many years nose tackle Vince Wilfork, at the exact spot that will cause the most debilitating roadblock.

5. TIMING IS EVERYTHING, SO DISRUPT YOUR OPPONENT’S

When Manning came to Foxborough for the 2004 AFC divisional playoff game, the Colts’ offense had been virtually impossible to slow down during the season or in their wild card victory against the Broncos, when they scored seven touchdowns in 10 possessions. That offense was nowhere to be found on January 16 against the Patriots; the Colts had the ball for barely 22 minutes and scored three points. One week the Colts were unstoppable; the next they were on their way home.

Did Belichick install an elaborate scheme that befuddled Manning? No. In fact, he simplified his plan by going old school and roughing up receivers—legally—as they ran their routes. Again, here’s Belichick the pragmatist: If the Colts’ record-setting offense is based on timing between the quarterback and the receivers, the easiest way to defend it is to throw a wrench into that intricate mechanism. Belichick did it through the art of rerouting: hitting a receiver on his route to alter his prescribed direction. Rerouting is not holding or interference; it’s a stab or a push intended to momentarily disrupt—and effectively blow up—the precise timing of a pass play
.

It’s a technique he mastered under Bill Parcells in New York: A little messed-up timing plus an onrushing linebacker meant big trouble for the offense, plain and simple. It got its best workout in the Giants’ many high-stakes battles against Bill Walsh’s West Coast offense. Belichick realized that the only way to slow down such a well-choreographed attack was to bully its receivers. Need more proof? Just ask Isaac Bruce, Torry Holt, and the rest of those Greatest Show on Turf Rams, the ones who lost to the Patriots in Super Bowl XXXVI.

I got a full-blown education on the art of rerouting during my second season with Belichick in Cleveland. After each game, I joined the defensive staffers, ostensibly to help them review our performance but mostly to listen and learn from their analyses. With Saban controlling the video, I sat, mostly quietly, as linebacker coach Al Groh and line coach Jim Bates went over every detail of their units’ work. Rerouting had already become such a huge element of our schemes that opponents would specifically attack the area of the field where the reroute occurred. For instance, offenses would run a seam route down the middle of the field just to occupy the linebacker. Meanwhile, they’d send a receiver across the field to the exact spot the linebacker had vacated. I love this kind of check/checkmate aspect of football strategy. The play—which we called a seam crosser—was a surefire way to exploit Belichick’s emphasis on rerouting, but only if they could get the rerouter to commit on the seam route. So, checkmate: Saban and Groh instructed their linebackers to punch, disrupt, and then turn back to cover the next crosser.

This heavy-handed physical tactic enraged many pass-happy teams but none more than the Peyton Manning–era Colts and their general manager Bill Polian. Polian grew tired of seeing Belichick’s Patriots bang around his receivers. After the 2004 AFC playoff game, he only said: “I give the Patriots credit for what they did; I won’t go beyond that.” Unfortunately for New England, Polian also happened to be a member of the NFL’s competition committee, and by the next season, wouldn’t you know it, the NFL was instructing officials to enforce its illegal contact rule more strictly.

In the current era of intricately timed passing offenses, disruption remains the key. But Polian made sure that playing defense beyond the five-yard grace area, especially against rhythm passing games, would be much more difficult from then on. It didn’t matter that Polian was thinking only about his Colts when he led the charge to enforce illegal contact and help hurry-up offenses and intricately timed passing schemes. Suddenly, the scales were tipped toward the passing game, and further rule book tweaks just put a thumb on that scale.

Belichick being Belichick, though, he didn’t complain or whine or lobby the competition committee. He rebuilt his own offense using the rule change he inspired and won three more Super Bowls with it.

6. DEFUSE EXPLOSIVE PLAYS

In 1994, when the Browns headed to Dallas for a late Saturday afternoon game, making the Cowboys play left-handed wasn’t going to be easy. That offense featured Michael Irvin at wideout; Jay Novacek at tight end; the man who would become the NFL’s all-time leading rusher, Emmitt Smith; and (maybe most of all) future Hall of Famer Troy Aikman. The Boys were so loaded that they didn’t have a left hand. The closest thing they had to a left hand was wide receiver Alvin Harper, who would have been a primary option on most other teams.

If we couldn’t make them play left-handed, we could do the next best thing: take away their big play potential with sure tackling and an awareness of where their chunk plays came from. Most NFL teams convert about 35 percent of their third downs, and that’s not going to get you down the field. A drive is far more likely to end up putting points on the board if it includes at least one run or pass of more than 20 yards. When coaches talk about a game or an entire season coming down to just a handful of key plays, this is what they’re talking about. Belichick’s plan for Dallas was simple: We’d let them have their catches and yards as long as they didn’t get too many yards all at once. And it worked. Smith got his 100-plus yards, but it took him 26 carries to get them. Irvin had seven catches, but the longest went for 18 yards. The longest play of the day was a 26-yard run by Smith. We held the Boys to 14 points and won.

I always laugh when a defensive coach says, “Besides that one 55-yard play, we played great run defense.” A great run defense doesn’t give up 55-yard runs. You know what else great run defenses don’t do? They don’t erase outlying plays from their record of the game; they focus on them and try to understand how they were allowed to happen so that they don’t happen again. On the jubilant plane ride back from Dallas, Belichick did not say, “If you ignore that one long run from Smith, we held him to 86 yards on 25 carries.” He said, “We did a good job of fixing the edge after Smith gained those 26 yards on the second drive of the game, which is why we held him to 86 yards on 25 carries the rest of the way.”

7. REMEMBER NEWTON’S SECOND LAW

When Saban ran our defense in Cleveland, he wanted to be in the perfect defense for each play. The thought of giving up 5 yards drove him as crazy as giving up 50. His impossible dream manifested in countless checks and adjustments before the snap of the ball. Decades later, you can still watch an Alabama game and see all the defenders looking toward the sideline for his last-second adjustments. Belichick is the exact opposite. In fact, before we hired him as our head coach in Cleveland, I told Belichick that I had watched him on the sidelines at a Giants game and noticed his hands in the pockets of his red Starter jacket and asked where he kept his call sheet. And in classic Belichick fashion, he said, “I call the same thing every play; why do I need a call sheet?” Belichick prefers to work with few checks and adjustments because above all he wants his defense playing fast. He wants them doing, not wondering what to do. He wants them reacting, not thinking. He hates mistakes, but if they happen, he wants them to happen while his defense is going 110 miles per hour.

Defensive team speed starts with the middle linebacker, the Mike. He is the quarterback of the defense and needs to be both mentally and physically fast. He is the one responsible for calling the defenses and getting everyone positioned correctly before the snap. But he is also the one who dictates the tempo. A Mike who can get from sideline to sideline in the run game and fulfill coverage or attacking assignments in the pass game keeps a team moving apace.

The best indicator of a fast defense: forced fumbles. I’m sure you’re familiar with Newton’s second law of motion, but in case it has slipped your mind, here’s a refresher: Acceleration is directly proportional to net force because net force equals mass times acceleration. Newton probably wasn’t thinking about football, but he could have been. When a defender hits a ball carrier, the best thing that can happen is that the ball comes loose. And when a faster, bigger defender hits a ball carrier, Newton says the ball is that much more likely to come loose. Show me a defense with a low number of forced fumbles and I will show you a defense with a slower-than-average Mike. Show me a fast-thinking, fast-moving defense and I will show you harder hits, more balls on the ground, and—all other things being equal—more wins.

8. THINK PRESSURE FIRST, SACKS SECOND

It seems like every great coach in history has an opinion on the art and science of blitzing. Vince Lombardi once said, “Blitzing is a form of weakness.” When he coached, that might have been true. Back then, a blitz meant sending six or seven men toward the quarterback while the secondary covered the receivers man to man. If the defensive front couldn’t get to the quarterback, the whole unit was in trouble. Of course, in those days, with the limitations placed on offensive linemen in regard to using their hands, not being able to get to the quarterback was never much of a problem for the defensive front. That is no longer the case. Changes to the rules have opened up the passing game, and defenses need to be creative in the ways they pressure the passer to make him throw before he wants to. That means being smarter about the kinds of blitzes sent at opponents.

When offensive coordinators call a play that results in a touchdown or a long gain, we compliment the “great call.” When a defensive coordinator calls a blitz that sacks the quarterback, we often just move on to the next down. But the particular details and timing of the call deserve our praise, too. Specific blitzes attack weaknesses in protection, and that means that defenses have to understand what those protections are trying to do and when the best time to attack them would be.

The thing is, most of the time coaches don’t have a good enough grasp of those particulars, and so they can’t be strategic about their blitz calls. They just blindly send as many guys at the quarterback as they can and hope for the best. In that sense, Lombardi was right: Random blitzes are a sign of weakness. But well-designed strategic blitzes most definitely are not.

Al Davis was also not a big believer in total pressure. He saw blitzing the way Lombardi did, as an admission of some inadequacy. In fact, he had a steadfast edict for all his defensive coordinators: Never leave the middle of the field open. And that contained an implicit corollary: no all-out pressures. It was Raider Law. That’s not to say that Davis forbade his defense to blitz; they just had to be sure to leave the free safety in the middle of the field when they did. Davis had reasons for his mandate, particularly his second rule of defense: no big plays. He felt a man in the middle of the field was an important last line of defense against big plays. Not surprisingly, though, his no-all-out-blitz decree handcuffed his defensive coaches and drove them all crazy. To them it felt like an impossible-to-overcome handicap. Every Raiders opponent knew of Davis’s no-all-out-blitz rule, and that meant that they didn’t need to prepare for that type of pressure.

In 1955, the legendary Paul Brown predicted that as quarterbacks became more mobile and accurate, sending extra men to pressure the passer would become a necessary evil. Writing for 
Collier’s
 magazine, Brown stated: “The great quarterbacks in future years will have to run as well as pass to survive pro lines, which seem to get rougher and faster every season. The defense places a greater emphasis on rushing the passer….The new development in pro football, therefore, will have to be the running quarterback.” The guy knew what he was talking about. But his crystal-ball certainty depended on a game in which the value of defensive linemen never wavered.

To this day there is nothing more powerful than a defense that can bring adequate pressure with a four-man front. When you can create pressure with just four players, that means you can flood passing zones with the remaining seven defenders, which makes a quarterback feel like he’s facing a 13-man defense. It’s such a powerful advantage that it tends to create nickname-worthy defenses such as the Fearsome Foursome of the Los Angeles Rams, the Steel Curtain in Pittsburgh, and Dallas’s Doomsday Defense. Today, though, the economics of the game (salary cap and free agency) make it hard to afford four top-flight rushers on one roster, and that’s why blitzing has become a difference maker. Only now the goal of blitz pressure isn’t to sack the quarterback; it’s to make him throw the ball prematurely and under duress. Forcing a quarterback to throw the ball “hot” is a huge win for the defense, especially on third down, because it will force a receiver to catch the ball short of the sticks and get the defense off the field.

In today’s pass-first football, pressure matters more than sacks do, as long as it’s strategic. What does it mean to be strategic with pressure? Simply put, it means to run the blitz that will attack the pass protection most effectively and give you the greatest chance to get a defender to the passer unblocked. Of course, that’s not simple at all. And it begins with understanding how the offense intends to protect the passer. What good is a pass-rush stunt blitz, after all, if the defensive end who is looping runs into an offensive tackle–tight end double-team block that is just waiting for him?

On TV you can hear the sideline microphones pick up a quarterback in passing situations screaming at his line, making sure they know where the Mike backer is. That’s because most pass protections designate a specific player—the running back or one of the linemen—to block the blitzer. The “point out” isolates the focal point of the defense, and all blocking schemes and responsibilities stem from that identification. Who picks up the blitz changes with the protection scheme, keeping the defense from knowing who it needs to worry about—for example, whether or not the tight end is participating in protection, too. All this means that the defense has a lot to decipher before it can choose a blitz with confidence. And choosing the correct blitz is only half of it. The defense needs to call it at a time that maximizes its chance of success. Play callers never get enough credit for making the correct call on the correct down on either side of the ball. Knowing “when” is a product of lots of film study.

One way to be strategic with pressure is to save something for the second half of the game. In Cleveland, we once faced a team whose offensive line coach wasn’t all that adept at in-game adjustments. The line coach was a former player, a good old boy, and the players fought hard for him, but he was not the quickest thinker. During the week, when he had time to review blitzes on film and work the problem in his own time, he figured out how to have his team ready for Sunday. But during a game he was at a disadvantage, so Belichick saved some calls for critical moments later in the game when the guy had no time to whip up a counter.

Bill Walsh loved putting all-out pressure on the quarterback, but mostly because it was a sign his game plan had gone well. He counted on his team getting a lead that would force opponents into playing catch-up through the air, leaving them vulnerable to defensive pressure. During my first year in the league, Fred Dean, our best pass rusher, held out for more money. Ray Rhodes, the secondary coach and one of my early defensive teachers, kept saying that we needed Dean back in the lineup to get interceptions. No, the 230-pound future Hall of Famer wasn’t being switched to safety. (Although I would have liked to see that.) Ray Bob—that was Rhodes’s nickname—explained that although Dean’s sacks were important, they weren’t nearly as disruptive as the constant pressure he brought even when he didn’t get to the quarterback. Time your blitzes for maximum impact while keeping a quarterback under constant pressure, and sooner or later he’ll crack.

9. ELIMINATE FOUR-POINT PLAYS

All third downs are not alike. A third down when you’re backed up in your own territory is more important than a third down at midfield, because if you fail to convert, your opponent will have excellent field position. The leg strength of most of today’s placekickers means there is a possibility of putting up points without the offense having to move the ball much. In fact, analytics will tell you that the outcome of a third down in the red zone can swing the score by four points, and you don’t have to be a math whiz to see how. If a team holds an opponent on third down in the red zone, it takes the prospect of a touchdown largely off the table, leaving the offense to settle for three—a difference of four points
.
 That’s huge. Most NFL games are decided by a lot less than four points, yet most teams defend all third downs the same way.

The “high” red zone begins at the 30-yard line, the border at which a field goal seems likely for today’s kickers. From there, offenses are attacking on what is essentially a 40-yard field (30 yards plus 10 yards of the end zone). This smaller field tends to limit the number of offensive plays a team can call, because you cannot stretch the defense or clear out zones, and that in turn shrinks the windows a quarterback can throw into and forces him to elevate his accuracy. A smaller field favors the defense—less ground to defend—especially if it tackles well and doesn’t allow yards after the catch or contact.

Playing defense in the middle of a regular field means having to defend length and width, whereas a defense in the red zone gets to focus more on width than on length. A throw to the back of the end zone has to be perfect; a receiver doesn’t have room to run under the catch. The back line is a defensive coach’s accomplice. Therefore, the trend today in the NFL is for teams to play more zone in the red zone, drop eight men into coverage, and let the offense wear itself out looking for a knockout punch. It’s like the Muhammad Ali tactic—you know, the rope-a-dope he used against George Foreman in Zaire. “Force them to take small, harmless gains in the red zone,” Belichick often told his defense, “and they will get impatient and make a mistake.” Then we counterpunch.

In 1991 Belichick transformed the Browns’ defense from one of the worst in the league to one in its top half with a slight talent improvement but a much greater emphasis on red zone third-down execution. By 1994, Belichick realized that four-point plays—stopping opponents on third down in the red zone and preventing field goals from turning into touchdowns—often came down to keeping a quarterback in the pocket.

Quarterback movement is a killer for a third-down defense because once the guy gets out of the pocket, all hell breaks loose. Think back to when you played touch football in the backyard. If you are covering a receiver, once the pass rusher yells his fifth Mississippi, the play becomes something else entirely. The quarterback scrambles, the receivers break their routes to get open, and chaos reigns. In the NFL, because teams often use eight men in coverage, that chaos can be epic. Zones break down into man to man, defenders have to chase down a scrambling quarterback, and holes open everywhere.

In a four-point-play situation, the goal is to not let the quarterback break the pocket. And that demands that defensive linemen attack as they would, say, a field goal—down the middle and always in front of the passer, keeping his sight lines narrow and his escape routes few. If the defense can build an umbrella around the quarterback, he cannot escape. Keeping a quarterback from running is not luck—it’s planned. Too many linemen run up the field, using swim moves to get by offensive linemen, creating space between themselves and other defensive attackers. But that space is an escape route for the quarterback. When the quarterback, afforded space, throws a touchdown from outside the pocket, the lineman walks off the field telling everyone, “I almost had him.” “Almost”s don’t make it onto the stat sheet for a reason.

This is why in Belichick’s scheme, defensive ends don’t have nearly as much freedom as they would like in any part of the field but especially in the red zone. In fact, ends who arrive in New England after playing for other teams have been known to complain about not being allowed to attack. But they learn soon enough that this kind of rush creates more problems than solutions.

Compounding the drama, the battleground is at its most intense on third down because the offense knows it needs to succeed to keep the ball and thus will do whatever it takes to extend the play. Most quarterbacks run only when it matters, and red zone third downs matter most, particularly in a situation when the difference can be four points and probably the game. Letting a quarterback convert a third down in the red zone with his feet absolutely breaks a defense’s back.

In Super Bowl XLIX, Russell Wilson presented a unique problem that required a foolproof rush plan for the Patriots. Stopping Seattle on offense was mainly about stopping Wilson from moving around in the pocket. We were more worried about his feet than about his arm, and more worried about him in the red zone than in the middle of the field. Only two Seahawks had more than one rushing touchdown that season: Marshawn Lynch, the star running back, who had 13, and Wilson, who had 6. Stopping Lynch from running the ball in the red zone would be difficult, but at least we knew what he would do: run. Wilson, in contrast, could feign like he was going to run and then throw a pass. Wilson isn’t tall (forget what the program says; he’s slightly under six feet), so he has a hard time seeing over the linemen. That means he needs to move left or right to find windows in the rush that afford him a view down the field. He does this with great success; his hit chart—a plotting of where he throws from—indicates that he is actually better when defensive pressure forces him from the pocket. If you want to handle Wilson, you better know what you want to accomplish with your pass rush.

To use a basketball metaphor, in Super Bowl XLIX the Patriots’ rush plan was to stop Wilson by getting their defensive linemen “in the paint,” or within one yard of and directly in front of the quarterback. That prevented him from stepping forward and seeing downfield. All quarterbacks hate dealing with someone in their face. They can deal with pass rushers running at them from the sides because they have room to step up and away. At the same time, from the defense’s standpoint, the worst place for any defender to be is two yards past the quarterback. You just rushed yourself right out of the play. Now it’s 10 on 11. Against Wilson, Belichick had his defensive ends play down the middle, inside the offensive tackles, forcing the quarterback to step into the paint, where our defensive tackles were waiting. Wilson finished the Super Bowl with just 12 completions, a manageable 39 yards rushing, and zero four-point plays.

10. GAMES ARE WON OR LOST IN THE FINAL FOUR MINUTES—OF THE FIRST HALF

To this day, when the Patriots win a coin toss, they often defer possession to the second half. The choice goes against conventional wisdom and usually is dismissed as nothing more than a Belichick quirk, but in fact, it’s a pretty ingenious tactical maneuver. All those years of facing Peyton Manning taught Belichick a great deal, but most specifically they taught him that the best plan on defense is to keep the offense on the bench. Forget blitzes, timing, and defensive disguises; the simple truth is that Manning was never less dangerous than when he was standing next to his coach, Tony Dungy.

Over time, Belichick actually built an entire game management theory around this simple realization. If the Patriots could manage a drive at the end of the first half and another at the beginning of the second, that would keep the opposing offense off the field for almost an hour of real time. For a guy like Manning, that’s an eternity. No offense, no points. No plays, no rhythm. When Manning does finally get back in the game, he and his offense have lost their edge.

Beyond that, Belichick’s tactic usually tips the number of total possessions in the Patriots’ favor. In chess, the player with the white pieces goes first, and that extra move often gives him or her a slightly better chance to win the game. Belichick’s coin-toss trick does the same thing in football, in which both teams usually end up with the same number (12) of possessions.

On the road, there’s a third benefit to deferring after winning the toss: It outlasts the crowd. (This is Belichick’s genius in a nutshell. He’s taken something as simple as the coin toss, something 99 percent of coaches don’t even think about, and found a way to extract considerable extra value from it.) At the start of the game, home fans are riled and loud. An away team that elects to receive has to deal with the crowd at its most rested and clear-throated. It’s a recipe for going three and out without even being able to hear the play calls. In other words, a precious series of downs has been squandered. At the start of the second half, though, the stadium has a different feel. Fans are still in the bathroom or on the concession lines, and the stands are half empty; it’s certainly not as intimidating as it is at the beginning. Visitors who have deferred receiving the kickoff don’t have to contend with a wall of noise and thus are better able to get into a rhythm before the fans are back in their seats.

But the thing is that Belichick’s tactic pays off only if the receiving team in the second half ends the first half with the ball. Too few teams play defense in the final minutes of the half with that in mind. How often have you cursed your favorite team when it goes into its prevent defense, willing to sacrifice yards for points, as the half winds down? Better question: How often have those curses turned into murderous rage when those “meaningless” yards turn into very real points? Far too often, right? Well, that’s because the best four-minute defense is not a prevent defense. It is a defense that fights to get the ball back for the offense.

To do that, defenses need to use a weapon most people see only as an offensive advantage: time-outs. (When Belichick deploys the tactic, it doubles as a disruptive influence as well.) Teams that play the Patriots know that if they don’t run the clock out and New England gets the ball back with more than a few seconds on the clock, the Patriots are capable of cashing in because no one runs the hurry-up better 
and
 their kicker can hit from the parking lot.

In basketball, coaches talk all the time about closing out quarters, but in football, the concept doesn’t garner much attention. Except from Belichick, who sees it is an opportunity to take over the game. For starters, by the time there’s four minutes left in the half, he expects his defense to know the offense’s game plan inside and out. If they don’t, he is there to remind them. Over the headsets, Belichick will say things like “This is a Landry game” when the Patriots are playing the Dolphins and he suspects that wide receiver Jarvis Landry will be the focal point. The ends of the halves are when those talented players rear their heads. For another thing, he knows that most offenses wait to take advantage of the way teams simplify their defensive calls in two-minute drills. He, of course, does the opposite. Meanwhile, at the end of the half, offenses looking to move downfield quickly think pass first and foremost. And when an offense becomes one-dimensional, it’s advantage defense.

When Belichick tells his team that games are won and lost in the final four minutes—and trust me, he does that a lot—he often means the 
first
 half more than the second.

11. IF YOU’RE NOT TALKING, YOU’RE NOT WINNING

Once in New England, Belichick ripped all the numbers off the preseason practice jerseys. Everyone thought it was intended to confuse the media and other onlookers, but really it was to force the Patriots defenders to learn one another’s names and get used to talking during the play. Belichick always said that if you want to know how well a defense is working, just listen. Defenses succeed only if the players know the scheme. But they really thrive when the players are talking to one another on the field. When it comes to adjustments, reads, and coverages, everybody needs to be on the same page in the lead-up and in the moment.

Belichick’s jersey trick didn’t always work, though. You’d be surprised how many players, even great ones, would rather just do their thing and not worry about anything or anyone else. Darrelle Revis was one of the best corners I’ve ever seen close up. He had fantastic awareness and instincts, and he could jam at the line to disrupt the timing of a pass as well as anyone. Quick feet, balance, the ability to play the ball—he had it all. Each week Revis would study his assignment and then go out and shut down the best receiver on the other side. For most of his career, his focus was on one man and one man only. He didn’t worry about what the rest of his teammates on defense were trying to do.

When he came to New England in 2014, though, he had to learn to communicate with our other new corner, Brandon Browner. Big and physical, Browner wasn’t as gifted as Revis, but he was a force on and off the field. One day in practice before a game against Peyton Manning and the Broncos, Revis went radio silent again in the defensive backfield, and the scout team hit them for a big play. That’s not supposed to happen, and you could sense the tension from across the field. Revis was worried only about his own assignments, not about helping the rest of the unit, and as practice wore on, the tension between Revis and Browner escalated.

When it finally boiled over, Browner flattened Revis with a massive roundhouse right to the temple. Revis got up, and the two continued to fight. I mean, really fight. This wasn’t like linemen pawing at each other in training camp; this was a bar brawl, one of the most brutal I’ve ever seen on a practice field. It went on until the coaches and players separated them.

Both guys were sent off the field; Belichick does not tolerate fighting. But sometimes he appreciates it. Revis might have been the better player, but Browner was the team leader and the leader had spoken, albeit with his fists.

And the message was heard. For the rest of the season, Revis was one of the chattiest defenders in the entire NFL.

Some lessons about playing defense are more painful than others.

