# 7

---



7

GAME PLANNING

PREPARING TO IMPROVISE

Everybody has a plan until they get punched in the mouth.

—MIKE TYSON

“They will be confident, riding high after a win.” That’s what Belichick told the Patriots players and staff who gathered in the team meeting room in Foxborough two days before the new year. In 2014 we earned the top seed in the AFC and a bye in the wild card playoffs, which left us in the strange position of preparing for a game without knowing who our opponent would be. But that didn’t stop Belichick, the most experienced and successful playoff coach in NFL history (26–10 lifetime), from putting his game plan into action. First things first: He wanted us to make sure we understood exactly what lay ahead, whoever our opponent would be. “They’ll have the momentum, so we have to be ready to play,” he continued. “We need to bring a great attitude and great energy. We need to be communicating and functioning as a complete team.”

There is a delicate balance to a bye week. You need to give the players a chance to rest and recharge while making sure they are properly focused for the next game. No one is better at this part of the game than Belichick. It’s just a fact: When he gets in the postseason, he wins. Only twice during his long career has he failed to win at least one game in the playoffs. That was in the back-to-back seasons of 2009 and 2010, a rare downturn that Belichick responded to by leading the Patriots to the Super Bowl (where they lost to the Giants, but still) the next year.

Believe me, the ghosts of squandered postseasons will forever haunt this coach’s dreams, spurring his unparalleled postseason preparation until the day he retires. Losses take a toll on any coach. But for Belichick, who is constantly asking what more he could have done, the toll is extreme. He never blames the players, instead pointing a finger at himself for not preparing them to win. There are members of that 2011 team, in fact, who still become emotional when recalling a broken and teary-eyed Belichick apologizing to everyone in the locker room after losing to the Giants.

Those rare playoff losses haunt Belichick and push him to another level of intensity when the postseason begins. You can sense the change in his demeanor and delivery when the calendar flips to January. So despite the impending time off, he had a captive audience in that meeting room. Everyone listened intently, afraid of being caught flat-footed by one of the signature gotcha questions with which Belichick peppers his meetings. When he calls on you and you don’t know the answer, he doesn’t get loud or berate you; he does something way more humiliating: He simply ghosts you and moves on to someone else. Most of the time, anyway. When veteran linebacker Rob Ninkovich was quoted in the paper saying that the defense needed to handle screen plays better, Belichick asked him in one of the next meetings how we should go about doing that. Rob had no answer and sank into his seat. After that, every time the subject came up, Belichick would turn to the linebacker and quip, “So, Rob, you have strong opinions on screens; what do you think?” The team would laugh—to themselves, of course. Point made. And made. And made again.

As he addressed the team during the 2014 bye week, Belichick warned about becoming complacent. He didn’t want his team falling for the common postseason wisdom that playing at home is as good as a victory. “Playing well with precise execution and avoiding mistakes will determine the winner,” he reminded the players, “not where the game is played.” He then made it clear that the holidays could not be a priority. He wanted his team focused on nothing but being the best they could be when next they hit the turf. “We can celebrate the new year some other time,” he said while staring right at Rob Gronkowski, a tight end known for his enthusiasm for partying. “Put everything in a back drawer for now. Focus on preparation. Nothing. Else. Matters.”

Playoff football is a completely different animal from regular-season football. In the single-elimination playoffs, games are lost far more often than they are won. Mental mistakes, turnovers, an abandonment of fundamentals—these problems are hard to overcome in the regular season and nearly impossible to survive in the no-wiggle-room scenario of the playoffs. There’s a huge responsibility on players to have their best week of preparation and even more pressure on coaching staffs to create and implement the perfect game plan.

Even though he’s got more playoff experience than anyone in NFL history, Belichick will be the first to tell you that experience is not preparation. Having previously participated in a playoff game means nothing. Conversely, he told the team, having no prior postseason reps does not necessarily preclude immediate success. Belichick then recounted the story of Hall of Fame linebacker Lawrence Taylor’s first playoff game in 1981. Taylor dominated the Philadelphia Eagles for 60 minutes, playing like he’d been there before because Belichick noted he had spent the week practicing as if he wanted to be there. That’s what he expected us to do.

We were the number one seed, and so we would play the lowest remaining seed. Of the three possibilities—the Baltimore Ravens, the Cincinnati Bengals, and the Indianapolis Colts—we were most concerned about the Ravens. Going by wins and losses, they were the weakest team in the playoffs, but they always gave us a hard time. In fact, in one of the years New England failed to advance beyond the first weekend of the playoffs, it was the Ravens who sent them home with a 33–14 thumping. Until we knew for sure, we would train our attention on the Ravens.

In the meeting, Belichick gave the players their practice schedule for the week. Later in the day he gave his staff their marching orders. But long before that, he had given me my postseason assignment: a complete analysis of the Patriots’ previous playoff performances, due the day after Christmas.

During the NFL season, there are no breaks. Luckily, my wife, Millie, always understood the time requirements of my job. As long as we had the opportunity to spend a little time with Santa as a family, she never objected when I inevitably had to head back to work. With home field advantage locked up, I had started my research a few weeks earlier, and despite the time away from home, I was having a lot of fun with this project.

The first thing I learned was that Belichick’s playoff game planning is informed by three things: (1) what his team does well (these things will require time to hone but not in-depth work), (2) what it doesn’t do well (these things will be the focus of practice), and (3) what he thinks it will take to win the playoffs in a particular year. The thick document I presented to him addressed each of these categories as they related to the 2014 team. The dossier was many pages long, so I won’t burden you with all of it. But here are the word-for-word summary and recommendations—unedited to this day, I hasten to add—that I delivered into Belichick’s hands at the start of our Super Bowl run.

SUMMARY

In New England’s playoff teams, the winners and losers, there are commonalities among each team that wins and others among each one that falls short. All were good teams, but the winning teams were “complete teams” that could win a game with the offense or defense and made an impact on special teams. The 2003-2004-2006 teams had the best defenses overall and the 03 and 04 teams won Super Bowls. The 06 team lost the conference championship game in Indy after a few defensive players were injured. Offense might have carried us into the playoffs, but winning the Conference Championship or the Super Bowl has been a result of great defense—simply put, keeping people from scoring: covering, rushing and tackling.

We have scored over 500 points during the season 4 times since 1999, 07-10-11-12, and two of those teams lost the Super Bowl. Obviously we need to score points, but we struggled to finish in the playoffs when we could not get control of the game with our offense and our defense was not strong enough to play well for 60 minutes. We have only held the ball over 30 minutes 1 time in the last four playoff games, which has caused the weaker part of the team—the defense—to play more and have more chances to make a mistake. In the 2011 postseason, we scrapped for 60 minutes against Baltimore and won, but when we played them again the next year, we controlled the game until the midway point of the third, then could not score again and lost. That time, we played great in the red zone to keep us in the game but fell way short on offense.

That game was a classic example of our offense not converting opportunities, not finishing drives, not executing at key parts of the game and allowing the Ravens to play within their comfort zone. We had chances to put the game away early, but we failed to execute big plays and failed to convert pressure third downs, which would have allowed us to end up in scoring position.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Our defense needs to make 
3rd and 4 or less
 as competitive as we can.

MAKE PRACTICE AS COMPETITIVE AS WE CAN THIS WEEK.
 
Playoffs are a different level of competition; our practices have to simulate the change.

We know we won’t make many throws over 10 yards

We need to use tennis rackets at practice to simulate linemen’s arms so we can prevent tipped passes in the game.

We must stay fresh, healthy and vibrant. We need our key players to play well—Gronk, Revis, [Jamie] Collins, Edelman and Brady. Second half of the games we have been poor on both sides of the ball. We NEED to be better in the second half.

WE NEED TO KEEP FINDING WAYS TO CREATE NEGATIVE PLAYS.

WHEN WE MAKE TEAMS PLAY LEFT HANDED, WE CAN WIN.
 In all three of our losses this year we never made the opponent play outside their comfort zone. When we do, we are hard to play. In Miami we never stopped the run. In KC we never forced Alex Smith to make a play. In GB we allowed them to have balance early in the game.

TACKLING DRILLS EVERY DAY.
 We will need to be the best tackling team in the playoffs and that means pad level work. Seattle is the best tackling team in the NFL; we are 14th.

EMPHASIS FOR PLAYOFF BYE

RED ZONE WINS—
Teams that play well in the RZ during the playoffs win. We allowed Baltimore to be 4 for 4 the last time we played them in a Championship game.

CONVERT 3RD AND 2 OR LESS—
We have to be able to convert third and short. Overall we might appear to be doing well, but in the first quarter of the last two Conference Championship Games, we were 3 for 10 on 3rd and short, which does not allow us to gain control of the game or confidence.

SIMPLE GAME PLANS WIN—
Players knowing what to do and doing it at a high tempo win. We must simplify and play without hesitation.

PRACTICE CRISP, FAST AND SHORTER—
Need to be fresh in the game. In 2013, we allowed 56 points in the entire playoffs, and 29 came in the 4th quarter. And we have not started fast either, because of poor third down execution. In four games we have scored 24 points in the first, and allowed 13. In games we lose, we don’t start fast, nor do we finish strong.

SPECIAL TEAMS MUST WORK ON KICK-OFF RETURN—
Had 10 KO returns in 4 games and didn’t average over 20 yards. Meanwhile we allowed a 94-yard return to Danieal Manning. WE HAVE NOT DOMINATED IN THE KICKING GAME COME PLAYOFF TIME. We have had no depth and it shows. WE MUST MAKE A PLAY HERE.

One of the many things I loved about working for Belichick is that I never had to hold back. All he wanted was the truth—whatever it was. With Belichick, every interaction is about trying to win and get better. Bring him a way to do either, and you get his full attention. In fact, until I handed him my self-scouting memo, he had no preconceived ideas about how to approach this particular postseason. After reading it, he began to set a course over the next two weeks. The data I had uncovered meant that regardless of the opponent, the Patriots would need to focus their effort on three areas: red zone, third and short, and the kicking game.

Before we sent the players away for a few precious days off prior to our first playoff game, we conducted one practice at our stadium on Thursday. It was a scrimmage to go over all the areas in my memo. Belichick usually reserves competitive intrasquad scrimmages for the summer as a way to get a feel for the lesser-known players trying to make the team. But in this case Belichick thought a postseason blue-white affair would be a good way to refocus everyone on the things that now mattered most, in particular those third-and-short situations. Third and short is a unique problem for the defense, in part because both the run and the pass are viable options. Belichick’s theme all week was that at this time of year an entire season can be lost on one play, and so players have to be prepared at every moment for every possibility. On days like this, the field is an extension of Belichick’s classroom, with each scenario analyzed and made actionable. Our goal was clear: Don’t squander any opportunity.

We also worked on ways to create such opportunities by inserting a few trick plays into the game plan. The first was a wide receiver pass from Julian Edelman, a college quarterback, to Danny Amendola. In week 4 we had actually called it against Kansas City, but the Chiefs seemed to sense what was coming, so Brady threw the ball to Brandon LaFell on a slant instead. That was great because it meant there was no film of that flea-flicker anywhere. If we ran it in the playoffs, it would be a total surprise.

The other trick play Belichick wanted to install came to him one Saturday as he was getting his fix of the college game. On that night he got home just in time to see the Crimson Tide head into overtime. During their first possession in the extra session, Nick Saban, Belichick’s friend and fellow football savant, called for a pass to what appeared to be the left tackle, who was actually a legally eligible tight end in an unbalanced formation. Alabama flexed its right tackle to the left of the defense, lining him up inside two receivers, while putting the tight end where the left tackle normally stands. On the snap, the tackle (lined up way outside like a receiver) just stepped back away from the line and the tight end (lined up inside like a blocker) ran down the seam and caught the ball for a huge gain. It was devilishly clever and all perfectly legit because, if you looked closely, Alabama had the requisite seven men on the line—just not in their normal spots. The next day Belichick breathlessly recounted the play to his offensive coaches and told them he wanted to start working on it right away.

After the quick-paced scrimmage, Belichick and the team headed over to the movie complex by the stadium to watch the soon-to-be-released 
American Sniper
. The movie is loosely based on the life of Chris Kyle, a Navy SEAL who was awarded a Silver Star and four Bronze Stars, among other medals. The movie was a classic Belichick choice because it highlights teamwork, sacrifice, and overcoming obstacles. Kyle is the star of his unit, an expert marksman who can hit a target almost a mile away. But he doesn’t act like a hotshot. He’s just one member of a team in which everyone has to do his job for the whole unit to succeed. The movie affected us all. It would have been easy to focus on Kyle’s impressive record as a sniper or the horrific and sad fact that after returning to Texas he was murdered by a former Marine he was trying to help. But as we strolled back to the facility afterward in the dark, all I heard was players talking about how Kyle’s unit kept working together even through chaos and life-threatening danger.

The movie stayed in the back of my mind for the whole weekend, even as I watched the Ravens pull away from the Steelers in the wild card game. By the end of the third quarter, I announced to Millie and our sons that we were going to be game planning for Baltimore. I knew what kind of a challenge we faced over the next week, and I must have been eager to get started, because that night my internal alarm clock went off at the ungodly hour of 3:45 
A.M.

There was no time to waste. Kickoff was less than a week away.

Here’s a behind-the-scenes look at everything that happened next as we prepared to play the Ravens.

SUNDAY: SIX DAYS BEFORE KICKOFF

Most of the players don’t report until tomorrow, but the staff spends all of today preparing game plans and scouting reports. It’s a short week, as our game is on Saturday, but that doesn’t change our to-do list. The Ravens-Steelers wild card game is already loaded into the video system, and the staff gets to work, preparing for Belichick to call a meeting to map out the rest of the week. Right now, though, he’s busy familiarizing himself with every detail of the Ravens’ different units, planning out our preparation, and forming a vision of the game in his head. When the staff comes together later in the afternoon, he will offer a few of his initial thoughts and then see how they jibe with the approach his coordinators have mapped out.

But first Belichick will conduct a meeting that has become the signature of his game-planning regimen: a private skull session with Brady. The backup QBs are also in the room, but it’s really just two of the all-time greats riffing and brainstorming about the challenges and opportunities in the upcoming game. Belichick begins by sharing his own handcrafted report on the Ravens’ defensive back seven. In exquisite detail he goes over the players, showing tape to accentuate his points as he discusses how to attack each of them and the unit as a whole. This is not a game plan meeting; it’s a scouting meeting—maybe the most exclusive in sports. Not even Josh McDaniels, the coordinator, is invited. Most coordinators are protective of their players and want to control who talks to them or whispers in their ear, but in New England that’s not an issue. Everyone knows Belichick’s vision and preparation have quite a track record and that whatever he has to say will only benefit the players, the team, and the coordinator, for that matter. When the players leave the session, they probably know more about the Baltimore secondary than most of the people on the Ravens’ staff. This private session includes Belichick’s unique approach to game planning: He starts at the end. Six days before facing Baltimore, he and his field general have already synchronized their brains and their focus. And this week that means moving right past first down—where most game plans begin—and to an increased emphasis on third downs.

After his one-on-one with Brady, Belichick studies tape while running on the treadmill. At five o’clock Belichick, still a little damp from his workout, is already seated at the head of the table as his coaches wander in for the full staff meeting. As soon as everyone fills his usual seat, he begins.

The first topic is inactives for the game. Belichick says that five players will not dress for sure and that the status of a few others will need to be determined during the week. It’s mundane but relevant because, with limited time to prepare, coaches don’t want to waste practice reps on guys who won’t see the field. Peeking at his typed notes, Belichick appears to be in a relatively good mood as he goes over what he wants to spend time on. Dressed in his signature look—frumpy workout gear—and sipping a protein shake, the first thing he tells McDaniels is not to take starting tight end Rob Gronkowski off the field. Never. Not once. “Make them defend him on every play,” he says.

The plan for Gronk is clear. The question Belichick has is which tight end he wants lining up alongside him. Based on the talk around the table, the coaches prefer reliable Michael Hoomanawanui—Hoo-Man to his buddies. He isn’t the fastest or most athletic guy in the league, but he understands the system, which gives the coaches comfort, and his hands are outstanding. Most important, Brady trusts him. That’s no small thing. If Tom doesn’t trust you, he won’t throw to you. For any veteran quarterback, trust is everything. For Brady, it is the only thing, and you don’t earn it easily. Just being on the team won’t cut it. Heck, just making the Pro Bowl won’t cut it, either. You must prove that you have made the offense a part of you, made it second nature, knowing where to be at all times. Brian Tyms was a receiver who made our team one year after an excellent preseason. He was raw—a track star in college—but he was hardworking and athletic. It wasn’t enough. He never quite got it, not to Brady’s satisfaction anyway, so he never saw the field, let alone the ball. This week our other choice at backup tight end is Tim Wright, a converted wide receiver who isn’t much of a blocker. We have plenty of talented receivers. What we need is help with the Ravens’ ferocious pass rush. Belichick, in full command, listens intently to the talk in the room, then makes the call. Even on major decisions he’s quick and decisive and leaves no room for lingering debate or doubt. When there’s an issue with the game plan, the staff talks it over, Belichick listens, then he rules, and that’s that. Against the Ravens’ edge rushers, an extra blocker makes the most sense. Hoo-Man, it is.

Finished with the tight ends, Belichick changes subjects abruptly. Turning to Scott O’Brien, he says he wants special teams to go right at Baltimore’s long snapper, Patrick Scales. That’s right, in the first meeting of the biggest week of the year, the long snapper is a topic of conversation. Don’t get me wrong. For me, a former college long snapper, I think it is a perfectly reasonable subject. And it’s pretty standard fare for a special teams savant such as Belichick. But everyone else thinks it’s a little random until Belichick starts talking about how pressuring the poor guy just might pay dividends. Belichick, a failed college lineman turned long snapper, is speaking from experience, but believe it or not, he actually knows something about Scales because he and O’Brien keep an updated database of every long snapper in the league just in case we need a new one. In fact, Belichick’s pro scouting department often brings in snappers for evaluation because, not surprisingly, the Patriots treat the long snapper with the same level of importance as a punter or kicker. Belichick and O’Brien must have uncovered something about Scales that tells them he can be rattled; not surprisingly, Belichick isn’t sharing that something with anyone.

Defensively, Belichick is concerned about the Ravens’ cut blocks, primarily how his hulking defensive tackle Vince Wilfork will handle the borderline dirty technique. He wonders out loud how we can simulate this in practice, duplicating the Ravens’ offensive tempo and tactics without injuring any of our players. For starters, we’ll need to spend extra time with our practice players to make sure they imitate the Ravens’ technique precisely—“cutting” a defender off near the knees, knocking him to the ground and thus out of the play—and that means a special meeting after the full team meeting. Nothing is left to chance; we need these practice players to give us an accurate but safe look. Belichick talks to the defensive coaches and Dave DeGuglielmo, our offensive line coach, to make sure everyone is on the same page. This is a mainstay of the Belichick process: Practice execution becomes game-day reality. Unless we can make our practice cut blocks convincing, we won’t be prepared to defend the Ravens’ go-to running play.

Once he checks off all the items on his list, we plan a week’s worth of practice, as Belichick’s son Steve, an assistant, transcribes it all on a grease board. As everyone expected, especially those who read my memo, third and short and third down in the red zone garner their own five-minute periods. Now, five minutes might not sound like much time to spend on something deemed so important. Let me assure you that in the football world, it’s a lifetime. Team preparation is a never-ending math problem, with practice time limited by restrictions imposed by the players’ union and the needs of a recovering human body. With so little time and so much to do, a coach has to find the right balance. There are 5,500 waking minutes, give or take a few, between now and kickoff, and Belichick doesn’t plan on wasting a single one. A team can run maybe eight plays in five minutes. If we’re on our game, that should be plenty.

MONDAY: FIVE DAYS BEFORE KICKOFF

The decor of the Patriots’ inner sanctum is constantly evolving and expanding. New framed action photos are added to the walls after each victory. The hallway leading to the team meeting room is decorated with portraits of the Patriot of the Week, an honor handpicked by Belichick and awarded after wins to the player who demonstrates selfless team-first behavior. These tributes hang throughout the season and are in this hallway for a reason: They are the last thing players pass as they head to the team meeting room each day.

Belichick welcomes the players back with the same spiel he laid out for the coaches the previous night: 
Baltimore is a confident team that has won in Foxborough before. They will not be intimidated. Forget the win-loss record, forget September and October games, what matters is how they are playing now—and they are playing well.

What is most interesting is what he doesn’t mention: any of the previous games the two teams have played against each other. He stays in the moment, focusing on the task that lies ahead. Who cares what happened in the past? What’s important, and you can hear it in Belichick’s voice, is that he has great respect for this opponent. When he praises the Ravens’ skill and toughness, he means it. In the regular season, Belichick has a habit of building up an opponent early in the week before systematically pointing out its myriad inadequacies as the days march on and kickoff approaches. The Ravens don’t need any puffing up; their success speaks for itself.

The longest workday of the week (because it’s when the game plan is installed and first run through) begins with the longest team meeting of the week (because of all there is to download). Like most team meetings, this one is not even five minutes old when Belichick brings up the importance of the kicking game. Again, special teams mean something different to Belichick. To him they set the physical and emotional tone of the team and the pace of our preparation. When Belichick mentions special teams so early in the meeting, what he’s saying is, “We will focus on every detail, no matter how small or insignificant, because all of it matters and any of it can lead to victory.”

The Ravens lead the NFL in hidden yards: yards that don’t make the stat sheet but have an impact on the game. The Patriots are so thorough that we even focus on things you can’t see. Stuff like a gunner on the punt team fighting through three blocks to down the ball at the 1 instead of letting it bounce into the end zone for a touchback. It won’t show up on the stat sheet, but that guy just saved the Ravens 19 yards in a game that will be determined by inches. Hidden yards.

Similarly, the Ravens are the best net punting team in the AFC, which means that more often than not they control field position. They also lead the league in kickoff returns. Belichick warns that the Ravens are aggressive on the road and love trick plays in the kicking game, and then he tells the team what he told O’Brien the day before: We have to attack the long snapper. Next, Belichick puts on his weatherman’s suit and directs the team to expect extreme cold, the slick heavy ball that comes with it, and the extra care in handling the football that will be required.

Turning to the section of the room where the defense is congregated, Belichick says the Ravens are under center almost 75 percent of the time and use a fullback more than any team in the NFL. Stopping the run will be key. He warns that they also like to call gadget plays and went for it on fourth down 18 times during the season. Belichick has great respect for Gary Kubiak, the Ravens offensive coordinator, and mentions the naked bootlegs that are a signature of his offense. Most important, when the Ravens need to make a play—in Belichickian terms, a “gotta have it” play—he expects them to try to get the ball to tight end Owen Daniels or wide receiver Steve Smith. Belichick is so certain about Daniels’s key role in the Ravens attack that he will speak his name more than that of anyone on his own roster this week.

Belichick then addresses his quarterbacks, who are sitting in the middle of the front row like star students. His first point to them will become his primary message of the week: We must stand up to their defensive front. We need to win this game in the trenches. Our offensive line cannot be pushed around. Surprisingly, we are not overly concerned about Baltimore’s outside pass rushers, Terrell Suggs and Elvis Dumervil, each of whom can get around the corner in a flash. Brady generally deals well with that type of rusher, getting rid of the ball quickly or stepping up into the pocket as the defenders race past. More problematic is the Ravens’ inside rush, spearheaded by Tim Jernigan, Haloti Ngata, and Brandon Williams. If they can push our guards back, it will prevent Brady from stepping up. If he is trapped in the pocket, the Ravens can then tee off on him, and Brady, like any quarterback, is far less effective when he’s taking a beating and fearing for his life. Suggs always plays his best against us. He’s quick to let everyone know how much he hates us and never calls Brady by his name, instead referring to him as that “good-looking fellow from up north.” Brady won’t stay that way for long, though, if we don’t play well up front.

Before each unit is sent off to be with its coaches and coordinators, Belichick closes the meeting by reading a few things the Ravens said after the Steelers game, including how much they’re looking forward to coming to Foxborough. The Steelers are the Ravens’ main rival, but the Patriots are definitely a close second. Suggs: “We all know the matchup the NFL wants to see, New England–Seattle. We’ll see if we can disrupt some people’s plans.”

Part of Belichick’s game prep this week is to avoid overcomplicating things for the players. It’s his job to decipher the avalanche of information that will flow through our staff over the next five days. As for the team, he wants them to focus on things such as special teams, converting third downs, covering Owen Daniels, protecting Brady, and practicing hard. So even his motivational approach—bulletin board quotes from the opponent—is the same thing you might see or hear in a high school locker room. It’s familiar and effective, so why change it? We’re not trying to reinvent the wheel this week; we’re just trying to beat Baltimore.

Belichick ends the meeting by saying that word out of Baltimore is that we don’t want to face the Ravens.

Obviously, we need to prove them wrong.

That means having our best week of practice, starting in a few hours.

MONDAY PRACTICE: FOUR AND A HALF DAYS BEFORE KICKOFF

The practice conditions are much like the game will be: cold and getting colder. The field is frozen; the footing is not sound. But this team is used to navigating lousy weather. As the team strolls out into the elements, wide receiver Brandon LaFell is the only player not able to practice; he’s been nursing a bad toe but should be ready for game day. This might be the most relevant fact of the week: In a violent game that is often dictated by injuries, we are completely healthy.

The team works hard. With pads on, the drills are physical, but they also serve as a moment of continuing education. My memo predicted that tackling will be a key this week, and we practice it accordingly. In football, proper pad level—knees bent, ready to strike, whether blocking or getting off a block—is everything. Broken down to its simplest terms, football is a game of leverage, and when pad level is too high, players lose that leverage. When pad level is at the correct height, though, the leverage it allows gives a player control at the point of contact. It might seem as if good pad level would be the price of entry in the NFL. Not so. Pad level is a fundamental that requires constant reemphasis and recalibration of muscle memory. The problem is that league rules governing practice permit one day of contact in pads a week, so most teams end up not reinforcing it as often as they should. Golfers work every club in their bag every day; football teams should work every part of their game each day as well. The winning ones do. We will emphasize pad level today and will continue to do so every day.

Brady is throwing well, and our receivers are catching the frozen balls without any trouble. During seven-on-seven passing drills, Belichick tasks the equipment men with waving tennis rackets to simulate the hands of defensive linemen trying to bat down balls. Brady hates this drill. It annoys him no end. But it’s a necessary evil: Led by Baltimore defensive tackle Haloti Ngata, the Ravens have knocked down 17 passes this season.

The most crucial drill of the day—cut-block avoidance—also seems to be going well. Chandler Jones, our starting defensive end, who missed a significant portion of the season with a hip problem, is moving effortlessly around the low blocks. If the Ravens decide to start clearly declining Eugene Monroe at left tackle, the matchup will favor us. Another of our key players seems healed, too: starting corner Brandon Browner. He’s a tone setter. He gets called for too many penalties and lacks speed, but more important for this time of year, his toughness is infectious. Our offensive line looks outstanding, too, especially tackles Sebastian Vollmer and Nate Solder. Just as we’d hoped, our scout team defense cannot penetrate our interior line, and Brady is able to step up in the pocket and cleanly deliver the ball downfield.

With a good first day under our belt, I join Belichick to watch the last part of practice, the one called the “Opportunity Period,” in which development of our youngest and taxi squad players continues, even this late in the season. Only one of the guys working out in front of us will suit up on Saturday, but Belichick won’t let them off easy regardless. He may be preparing for next Saturday, but that doesn’t mean he can’t also prepare for next season. And the one guy who may get called on is in many ways the most critical player outside of Tom Brady: backup quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo. Most teams don’t even consider this contingency. In fact, as the season progresses, most teams increasingly give all meaningful practice reps to their starters. (That’s what the Colts always did with Peyton Manning. When a TV announcer asked their offensive coordinator about it, he said if Manning ever went down, they were “fucked” and “we don’t practice fucked.”) An injury to a starting quarterback in the playoffs is a disaster in its own right, but it is compounded if the importance of the game means the backup has not gotten the practice reps he might normally get and surely needs. The Opportunity Period ensures that Garoppolo will be ready: maybe not Tom Brady–ready but more than ready enough.

After practice, the players sit through a brief review session and a meal. I have seen many organizations try to save money at mealtime, dishing out less than the best quality or selection. That is not the case in New England. The Patriots’ cafeteria is impressive. The minute players enter the building, the blenders start whirring, cranking out protein shakes, and a hot meal awaits. The cafeteria sends a positive message to the players the same way companies such as Apple and Google pamper their employees with plush modern campuses. Some teams talk about being first-class; the Patriots are.

When the players head back to their meeting rooms to watch tape or to one of the sleep rooms Belichick had installed at the facility so that players can stay rested, the coaching staff sits down to rewatch practice. At the head of the table with remote in hand, Belichick admits that the practice field conditions are a problem. As much as he’d rather not give in to the elements in any way, he sees no choice. Tomorrow we will be on the turf inside Gillette Stadium.

The practice-review session is a glimpse into how the game might go, and Belichick operates in this meeting as he does on the sideline during a game: asking questions, making suggestions, letting the coaches know what is acceptable and what is not. (The only difference: no headsets.) Never raising his voice, he makes a point and lets the film continue to play. Just as with the tight end decision, there is no gray area; no one is confused, and by the end no one isn’t 100 percent certain of his assignment.

We start, as always, with the kicking game. Coach O’Brien gives the calls for the returns and explains his thinking around each one. As we watch the units go through their paces, Belichick pays close attention not only to make sure the main team is performing as they should but to be certain the scout team is giving us a good look as well. As we watch the defense practice their first-and-10 calls, Belichick tells coordinator Matt Patricia to make sure we attack the quarterback from the get-go. Kubiak always comes out throwing against us, Belichick says.

The session takes an hour and a half, and Belichick makes notes throughout. That will come in handy tomorrow morning at the next team meeting, when he’ll use clips of the prior day’s practice as a teaching tool. Once the film is over, Belichick reminds the coaches that ball security and third downs are critical and urges them to keep the tempo high in practice. The meeting ends, and the coaches head back to their offices to prepare for tomorrow.

Most won’t head home until well after midnight.

TUESDAY: FOUR DAYS BEFORE KICKOFF

As the game approaches, the mood in the building never wavers. From one week to the next, the Patriots maintain the same demeanor. This is the case because Belichick never wavers either, always more concerned about preparation than about the magnitude of the game. He understands, of course, that the playoffs are not like other games, but he doesn’t show it—not in his behavior or routine. Instead, he continually reminds his assistants not to change their methods or show a different look. “If the players sense we are tense, they will be tense,” he reminds them. It’s an approach that soon will be tested to the extreme.

At the 8 
A.M.
 meeting today Belichick begins by complimenting the players for the previous day’s effort. He lets them bask in that moment for about 10 whole seconds, then it’s right back to work. Belichick shows clips of what Ravens quarterback Joe Flacco can do when he gets too much time on first down. As the video plays one “chunk” big-yardage play after another, Belichick’s omniscient voice-over fills the room. “We must be aggressive on first down and get him to play fast,” he says. The video shifts to short-yardage plays, and once again Belichick reminds us that the determining factor will be our ability to stay on the field on third and short while getting them off the field in the same situation. The messages this morning are no different, but the presentation is. There’s an edge to his voice now. “Look at this moron; guy can’t even make a tackle and get off the field,” he says in a sarcastic, biting tone. Who the moron is hardly matters; he can be any of the zillions of players who fail at some point to perform up to Belichick’s standards.

The players watch and listen as the video jumps to a montage of Jacoby Jones. The Ravens’ return man and wide receiver is respected by our team and staff. He is big, powerful, and fast and breaks right through arm tackles. “Look, if we don’t cover well and gang tackle, we won’t control field position,” Belichick explains bluntly as we watch Jones return a kick 108 yards for a touchdown during the season. Belichick’s use of voice and video gets today’s points across: Contain Flacco, win the third-down battle, swarm Jones.

—

Today’s meeting is much shorter. Just before Belichick dismisses the players to their positional get-togethers, he informs them that practice will be in the stadium, adding unnecessarily that it will be bitter cold.

Then, so as not to disappoint his players or mess with our routine, he leaves them with his touching farewell: “Get your shit on and be ready.”

As it turns out, the wind is a massive problem, whipping from every direction and making it that much more unbearable. It doesn’t bother Brady, of course; he throws the ball the best he has thrown it all week. He’s remarkable, really. I wish every fan could see him at work like this. Sometimes I think watching Brady every day is like living at the foot of Everest: The magnificence almost becomes routine. Julian Edelman, meanwhile, looks like the best player on the field, and Gronk is moving well. The only disappointment is that LeGarrette Blount, our power back, has the flu and is sent off the field to the training room.

After practice, as the team gathers around, Belichick reminds everyone to stay hydrated. No time for soft tissue injuries.

At the postpractice staff meeting, Belichick lists the latest inactives. The Ravens, he notes, are healthy, too. Jernigan and Monroe are banged up, but they should be ready. Then he reiterates for the defensive coaches their first priority. The certainty in his voice is unignorable. “When they need a fucking play,” he snarls, “I’m telling you they are going to Daniels.”

WEDNESDAY: THREE DAYS BEFORE KICKOFF

Today the schedule begins to vary a bit from our regular-season routine. The next two days will run like a couple of usual Friday practices: no pads and an intense focus on situational football. That means red zone work, third-down situations, and Belichick’s all-important “gotta have it” plays. But it also means no evening meetings, and so the coaches can go home, get away from the facility, and recharge with some family time.

At the full team meeting Belichick cues up the Ravens-Steelers game. Belichick will spread the viewing and real-time analysis over a couple of sessions. He takes his time for two reasons: (1) to adequately explain relevant game situations and (2) to drill down on the details of the few plays that cost the Steelers the chance to advance. You might think that once the lights go out, the players’ wakefulness will soon follow, but that’s not the case. Everyone is fully engaged, eyes on the screen, because they all know Belichick might call on them to answer some game-situation question. You don’t want to be the snoring guy when he does, not if you want to stay a Patriot.

We watch the first half and listen to Belichick review all the game-changing moments. The Steelers dominated time of possession—almost 21 minutes to 9—yet trailed, 10–9. The reason: too many drive-killing negative plays, including three sacks. And though Ben Roethlisberger threw for 183 yards with only six incompletions, the offense couldn’t find the end zone. Without the injured Le’Veon Bell, the Steelers had no running game, and as Belichick reminds everyone, you cannot expect to beat the Ravens throwing the ball 60 times. It all comes back to basics: We need to control the line of scrimmage. We need to run the ball. We need to convert on third downs, especially in the red zone. Meanwhile, the Ravens’ first scoring drive was assisted by a personal foul penalty on Steelers safety Mike Mitchell, and Belichick jumps all over that. “These dumb fucking penalties are going to cost us,” he says. “We cannot have them. We have to stand up to these guys, but we cannot lose our composure.”

The team watches as the Steelers answer the Ravens’ drive with 12 plays of their own that end in a field goal. But the drive was slowed by a first-down sack that forced a second and 19, one more chance for Belichick to hammer home his no-negative-plays-especially-on-first-down mantra. As he puts it, “There are 70 plays in a game; we need to make them all count.” The tape stops at halftime. The screen goes dark, and the team disperses.

Today’s practice features the defensive backs working on long balls. Long balls are part of every Belichick practice, but this week they get even more attention because Flacco has drawn 15 pass interference penalties this season that eventually were converted into 56 points. We don’t just practice covering the deep throws; we work on playing underthrows, too, reminding our defensive backs to get their heads turned around in time to play the ball while avoiding getting tangled up with a receiver. We are going to make the Ravens’ offense earn its points.

THURSDAY: TWO DAYS BEFORE KICKOFF

Today is Gotta Have It Day.

It begins with an 8 
A.M.
 meeting featuring part 2 of Belichick’s review of Steelers-Ravens. We settle in as Baltimore opens the second half with the ball, and right away it’s the perfect storm for Professor Belichick. On third and two at their own 37, the Ravens take a shot down the field that, right on cue, results in a pass interference penalty because the Steeler in coverage, Antwon Blake, fails to find the ball in the air (the exact thing we worked on in yesterday’s practice). It’s a 32-yard gain. “Always be ready for the shots and play the ball,” Belichick says.

During the next series, the Ravens take another shot. This one is a 40-yard completion on first down. “We cannot sit back and wait on first down,” Belichick preaches. The score goes to 20–9, and Belichick fast-forwards, stopping only when Ravens running back Justin Forsett fumbles at the Steelers 47 with the game seemingly in Baltimore’s control at the start of the fourth quarter. “This is how you lose games—not protecting the ball,” Belichick says.

One play later, the Steelers score a quick touchdown. After their two-point conversion fails, Belichick fast-forwards again to a third and long on the Ravens’ next possession. It’s a critical moment, and Belichick doesn’t let it pass. “The Ravens gotta have it, so who is getting the ball?” he asks. A few faint votes for Owen Daniels echo in the dark room, and Belichick confirms, “Right, when they need a play, it’s going to be Daniels. We have to get him.” This is how Belichick inserts his game plan into the team’s collective subconscious one vital detail at a time. He plants the message—stopping Daniels is a key to winning—then he proves it and repeats it using several different media until it’s ingrained in our brains. Then Belichick shows us what happens when we don’t follow the plan. The tape rolls, Daniels gets free, and the Ravens convert on their way to another field goal that puts them up 23–15.

Roethlisberger throws an interception, and Belichick stops the tape.

“What’s next?”

Again, a few unconvincing murmurs from the crowd. Almost before Belichick has a chance to agree—“Right, a shot”—Ravens backup tight end Crockett Gillmore catches a 21-yard touchdown pass that ices the game.

The Ravens beat the Steelers because they made all their “gotta have it” plays. It’s a nice segue. Near the end of any preparation week, Belichick uses days like these to go over the plays and players he feels will be difference-makers in the game. First, he highlights Ravens wide receiver Michael Campanaro. God knows why; Campanaro is a seventh rounder who has been active for only four games and did not have a single catch against the Steelers. It seems like guesswork or secret intel, but it’s actually Belichick’s powers of deductive reasoning that have led him to Campanaro. He knows one of our weaknesses on defense also happens to be one of the Ravens’ strengths: the middle of the field. Campanaro, meanwhile, is quick and strong and can separate in the slot and win in man coverage. It’s a calculated prediction, not a wild guess. We will keep our eye on Campanaro on Saturday.

At practice, though, all eyes are on Alan Branch. The sun is out but the weather is brutal, yet the players seem to be inspired. Branch, a defensive tackle we signed late in the year to bolster our depth along the line, works so hard that sweat freezes on his body.

FRIDAY: ONE DAY BEFORE KICKOFF

During the regular season, the day before a game is quick and easy. During the playoffs nothing is.

Belichick calls a last-second 7 
A.M.
 coaches’ meeting before the full team meeting to go over final details and a few future projects. All the coaches are in their seats at least 10 minutes early, meaning that for once Belichick is the last man in. This pleases him, and once seated at his spot at the table head, he looks at his notes and then up at his staff and announces that he wants everyone to review the previous four Patriots’ postseasons to uncover anything we may have missed in our preparation. He wants them watching not through the lens of their particular unit or area of expertise but as a team of objective, independent observers. Of course, there is no assurance he will agree with their assessments or act on their recommendations, but no one doubts that he will process all the new information and won’t hesitate to incorporate anything he deems worthwhile. More than anything, this is an exercise in staying focused on the big picture, leaving no stone unturned, and seeing the game through fresh eyes and with a different perspective.

Belichick then reiterates that he wants the team to play fast and aggressive but most of all poised. It’s a fine line. 
We cannot let the Ravens push us around, but we cannot lose our composure.
 Finally, he demands a good start from our kicking game and precision in our two-minute drills. Belichick sends us off with this boiled-down report of the Ravens’ mentality: “They think they can cover Gronk with [safety] Will Hill, dominate our offensive front, and win.”

After the team meeting and walk-through, the players are free until they have to report to the hotel for the 7 
P.M.
 special teams meeting. The coaches work on the playoff project, dutifully typing up pages and pages of notes for the boss before heading home for a few hours. They pass Belichick’s car in the parking lot. He doesn’t go home on nights before a game. He works out, watches more tape, shuts the world out, and locks in on the task at hand.

Belichick holds his evening coaches’ meeting at the local hotel the team stays at the night before the game. This session has always been one of my favorites. In it, Belichick goes over how he sees the game playing out and doles out parting instructions to his coordinators. The first order of business, though, is to finalize the inactive list. Then it’s on to the officials. Belichick reviews all the Patriots games that Bill Vinovich, the head official assigned to our game, has done. He informs the staff that he actually went over the trick plays we might run with Vinovich to make sure we don’t catch his crew off guard. Fans, players, and coaches alike forget that the pace of the game is just as fast for officials as it is for the rest of us; forcing them to figure out a proper call on an unusual circumstance in the heat of the moment is asking a lot. When it benefits us, we try to make life a little easier for them. Belichick doesn’t worry about Vinovich spilling our plans to the Ravens. He’s not worried about the play’s legality, either, because he’s already had a chat with the league office about the rules. The man leaves nothing to chance.

Not that he doubted the legality of his play. It already had been confirmed by his own resident rules pundit, Ernie Adams. Many people have asked me what Adams actually does for Belichick. As far back as Cleveland, owner Art Modell would say, “I will pay $10,000 to the person who can tell me what Ernie Adams does.” Adams doesn’t attend meetings, nor does he coach a position. He’s a confidant of Belichick’s, a trusted friend, a sounding board, another set of eyes and ears, and a legitimate rules expert. He knows the rule book as well as the head of officials, probably better. Add his great understanding of the history of the game, and Adams is an incredible resource and comfort for Belichick. The coach confers with him on replay challenges, and he’s always nearby when Belichick is in a conversation with the refs.

Adams also brings me to the elephant in the room. Call me a Kool-Aid drinker if it makes you feel better, but here’s the fact: The Patriots don’t cheat. Okay, maybe they do a little. But only stuff that all teams in the NFL do to try to gain an advantage. And I’m not talking about unbalanced line play here; that’s just knowing the rules, pushing things right up to the edge in an effort to gain every possible advantage. It’s not cheating, although it’s often portrayed that way. I’m talking about the biggie: filming another team’s signals. It was wrong, and they paid a hefty price—draft picks, fines, and permanent damage to the franchise’s reputation—but they were doing only what other teams have done and will continue to do.

How do I know? Because I have worked for some of the great signal stealers in the game. I am not going to dime anyone out; I’m no rat. But trust me, it happens all the time. In fact, it happens so often that everyone in the NFL knows who the signal stealers are and makes sure to hide their calls when they play them. And as much as it happens in the NFL, it happens much more in the college game, where the absence of radio communication means they have to call plays from the sideline.

My point is that the Patriots push the envelope and leave no stone unturned to a degree that is unmatched in football. Just don’t confuse Belichick’s obsession with all-out preparation for cheating. It ain’t. And don’t get me started on Deflategate. That was not some sinister conspiracy. I’m not sure it was anything at all. What I do know is that no one in the building that I talked to—Belichick included—had any idea about any of it.

Belichick ends his final meeting with directions for each and every coach. He starts with special teams, urging O’Brien and his assistant, Joe Judge, to make a play before getting in a little dig that he gleaned from my research: In our last nine postseason games, our special teams took 10 penalties. We cannot continue to beat ourselves, Belichick says. No one disagrees.

He turns to McDaniels to let him know that he wants the offense to put our best groups out there early so that we start fast and play with the lead. Most teams have an offensive script that doles out when each contributor gets involved, and that script depends on game situation and management. Because Belichick wants that early lead, he wants almost nothing held back—not formations, not players, not core plays. Playing with the lead, he says, is crucial against Kubiak, because it forces him into more drop-back formations, which are not a strong suit of his schemes. In this mode Belichick comes across as a chess grandmaster who is playing out both sides of the board in his head at all times, not just his moves but everything his opponent might do to counter them.

Belichick continues down his list: He wants to check from run to pass, not just pass to run; he wants to support Solder, our offensive tackle, early in the game against Suggs with a chip-blocking running back; he wants everyone to be sure where the yardage sticks are on crucial downs and to be aware that the Ravens will be all over Gronk on first and second downs. He wants to make first downs on all second and shorts—to stay out of third downs; he wants McDaniels to remember that once he sees their defensive game plan, he will know their game plan (the Ravens don’t make many adjustments); he wants the offense to spread the Ravens out deep in our own territory.

Finally, he tells McDaniels the one play he does want to save for the second half: our unbalanced line play, or what has come in the last week to be known as the “Baltimore play.” “I don’t want them to have time to adjust,” Belichick explains, thinking that using it in the first half would preclude his coming back to it in the second because the Ravens would have halftime to study it.

As for the defense, Belichick emphasizes keeping the line fresh for the fourth quarter because he senses the game will come down to the final minutes, as so many of the past battles with the Ravens have. Belichick tells Patricia he wants to start the game with calls we’re familiar with to avoid early mistakes; he wants us playing clean, sharp, and fast. Plus, he’d rather get Kubiak to show his hand and then make the necessary adjustments before running more exotic calls. Belichick is still worried about cut blocks and wants to make sure the coaches in the skybox are paying close attention to how our defensive linemen are being handled. He reminds Patricia one more time to keep an eye on Campanaro and lets him know to expect more 11 personnel (one tight end, one back) from the Ravens on first down while warning about assuming they’re going to run the ball out of 12 personnel (one tight end, two backs). Belichick is pretty confident they will come out throwing regardless of the formation.

After encouraging everyone to keep his poise and focus and to forget about bad plays as soon as they happen, there is nothing more to do or say.

The planning is over.

It’s time to play.

SATURDAY: PREGAME

The team—even Brady—spends the night at the hotel, and the next morning Belichick addresses them before everyone heads to the stadium. He is no rah-rah Rockne type; his well-worn monotone never rises or betrays emotion. Think 
Dragnet
’s Joe “just the facts, ma’am” Friday. Still, the players don’t know quite what to expect from this meeting, as Belichick never does the same thing twice. This time, Belichick shows the team a short tape of the season’s positive plays to reinforce the fact that when we focus and do things correctly, we are tough to beat. Everyone is feeling pretty good as he stresses one more time what we need to do to win.

He finishes with a short discourse about sticking together, handling the inevitable ups and downs of the game, and never giving in—just as Chris Kyle never gave in.

It’s not especially eloquent, but it’s remarkably prescient.

Meeting over, Belichick drives directly to the office to start his final preparation. He goes over the practice video once more on the off chance that something has escaped his notice. He is not looking to have a conversation; he values this alone time. We all know better than to break his quiet focus. Even when he brings the video to the weight room to watch during his pregame workout, he is left alone, a prizefighter before a championship bout.

—

His weatherman’s prediction is accurate; the shining sun is fighting a losing battle. Once night falls, it will be even worse, and that is bound to have an adverse effect on our home field advantage. It’s not that fans won’t show up—of course they will—it’s that they will all be bundled up in scarves and gloves, and that will deaden the noise in the stands.

After watching the first half of the Seahawks-Panthers game in my office, I’m pretty convinced that Seattle will be the NFC’s representative in the Super Bowl. The Seahawks lead at halftime 14–10, but I know from the scouting I did in the weeks leading up to the playoffs that they are a dominant fourth-quarter team, so an early deficit against them is hard to overcome. They just keep grinding until they wear you down. I see little hope for Carolina.

As I walk onto the field an hour and a half before kickoff, the stadium looks like a postcard. The sky is dark, but the moon is a lamppost. It’s a perfect night for football.

SATURDAY: GAME TIME

As is the norm when the Patriots win the coin toss, we defer, hoping for a dominant three and out to set the tone. But today, despite all the time, energy, and expertise we put into preparing for the Ravens, very little goes as planned. And that begins with the coin-toss tactic. Just as Belichick said they would, the Ravens come out firing. They throw on nearly every first down (another Belichick prediction) and score in just five plays. Before our fans have even settled into their seats, we’re down 7–0. So much for starting fast. We certainly didn’t game-plan for this.

To make matters worse, our offense starts slowly, too; after one first down, we’re forced to punt. We’ve been preparing for this game around the clock for a week, and five minutes in, the team has done nothing Belichick asked of it. But just as he preached at our staff meeting on Tuesday morning, Belichick shows no signs of panic. He’s as calm as can be on the headset. You’d think we were up three scores by the tenor of his voice. Maybe a little panic is in order, though, because on their next drive the Ravens march down the field again, in 11 plays this time, mixing the run and the pass, to go up 14–0. The stadium falls deathly silent.

Mike Tyson has a great line that he may or may not have borrowed from Joe Louis: “Everybody has a plan until they get punched in the mouth.” That is exactly what has just happened to us. And that makes all the work we did to prepare exponentially more important. We have to stick with the plan. Our interior line holds the Ravens’ pass rushers at bay, and with time and space, Brady begins to chip away. Getting the ball to Gronk and others, we answer quickly, scoring a touchdown from the 4-yard line with Brady running it in on third and short. Yes, Brady ran it in. Apparently, someone was listening to Belichick preach all week about the importance of converting on third downs in the red zone. (Gronk, by the way, will never come off the field and will end up with 108 yards receiving.) Later, after our defense steps up, Edelman has a 19-yard punt return that gives us good field position. (Our special teams play is tilting the field in our favor, and suddenly it makes sense that Belichick led off every meeting with that unit.) Now the game feels more like the one Belichick envisioned. Moving the ball down the field with his arm this time, Brady caps off the drive with a touchdown pass to Amendola to tie the score. With just under four minutes to go in the half, if we can stop the Ravens one more time, we can use the next two possessions—the last of this half and the first of the next half—to build a lead.

And then, wham! Another sock to the jaw.

Brady throws a rare interception, and you’ll never guess who the Ravens go to when they need a touchdown at the end of the half. Right, Daniels. Or, as Belichick referred to him all week, “fucking Daniels.” It’s as if the entire team slept through our week of game prep. We squander our first possession of the second half, too, and Baltimore scores again to take a 28–14 lead. If there was no panic before, that’s no longer the case. Now the headsets carry a definite urgency and maybe even a hint of fear.

From everybody but Belichick, that is. Instead, as the offense takes the field, the coach instructs McDaniels that it’s time to break out the Baltimore play. Belichick has a keen sense of timing, rhythm, and momentum, especially in bigger games, and he realizes that we no longer have the luxury of holding anything back. Of course, the mere fact that he has such a play in his pocket—like one of the gadgets in Batman’s utility belt or a “break glass in case of emergency” cabinet—is remarkable in and of itself. It’s as if he knew we’d need something like this to rattle the Ravens and shake us out of our deep freeze. (If I didn’t know better, I’d say Belichick enjoyed using our reputation for playing fast and loose with the rules to our advantage.) The unbalanced look completely baffles the Ravens, sending their staff into a wild frenzy. We gain 16 yards on the play—not bad, if less than we were looking for—but it delivers a secondary benefit: It sends the Ravens’ bench into a tailspin. The cheating Pats are DOING IT AGAIN! That’s how I interpret their body language, anyway. Across the field, head coach John Harbaugh is apoplectic, screaming and ranting at Vinovich. Apparently, he doesn’t know the NFL rule book and/or he missed the Alabama-LSU game.

Belichick sees how much the play has flustered Baltimore, so he decides to go for the jugular and double down. Run it again, he tells McDaniels. This time we flip the formation—this one’s called “Raven”—and the play gains 14 yards. But the impact is much greater. Harbaugh looks as though he might stroke out before getting called for an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty that moves us inside their 5-yard line. I’m pretty sure that’s what Belichick referred to during Wednesday’s film study as a “dumb fucking penalty.”

Two plays later, we score. It’s 28–21. My intimations of panic have dissipated. The crowd is going nuts. The Ravens are rattled.

Game on.

With our defensive linemen fighting off the Ravens’ cut blocks and our corners and safeties limiting Flacco’s chunk plays downfield, we get the ball back at our own 30. Over the headsets, I hear Belichick remind McDaniels about the double pass play. It works perfectly as Edelman heaves it to Amendola to tie the score. The Ravens are on the ropes, but Harbaugh doesn’t seem to get it. He’s still bitching about those unbalanced formations. It almost makes you feel sorry for him. Almost.

As the fourth quarter begins, Baltimore goes on a 15-play drive that brings them to a third and seven at our 7. This is clearly a “gotta have it” play. Every Patriot knows where the ball is going. We prepared for this moment, and now all we have to do is operationalize Belichick’s mantra. 
Practice execution becomes game reality.
 The coaches and Belichick are all yelling that we have to get Daniels. On cue, Flacco sends a pass toward his tight end—who is double covered. The ball sails over his head, and the Ravens have to settle for a field goal. Fun fact: The Ravens finish just 1 of 9 on third down while the Patriots convert on 6 of 11, and it proves to be the difference in the game.

Knowing we can take our first lead of the game, Brady marches us 74 yards, capping things off with a 23-yard touchdown pass to LaFell, bad toe and all. With the front of the pocket clean, Brady was repeatedly able to step up, avoid Suggs on the edge (he managed just half a sack in the game), and pass for 367 yards. Now, with slightly more than five minutes to play, Belichick and the staff urge the players to stay in the moment. Our defense is fresh, remembering Belichick’s instructions this morning to keep something in the tank for a late, desperate surge by the Ravens.

The final minutes of a playoff game are a now-or-never war—football at its best. The Ravens’ next drive involves all their receivers—including Campanaro, who makes a tough catch over the middle. Right before the two-minute warning, the Ravens are confronted with a fourth and three. When they break the huddle, Belichick “takes a Kodak”—a quick mental picture of the Ravens’ formation—to try to predict what they will run. But on this, the ultimate “gotta have it” play, we know what’s coming next: a pass to Daniels. We know it, but we just can’t stop it; the Ravens convert. We know not to take stupid penalties, too, but we jump offside anyway, gift-wrapping a second and five for the Ravens. But we also know this: When you’re in four-down territory, the best time to take a shot is on second down. And when Flacco does a poor job of looking off the safety, Duron Harmon intercepts the ball.

The pick seals the win. The Patriots become the first team in playoff history to overcome two 14-point deficits.

The game was a war. We took their best shots, stayed together, stuck to the plan, kept fighting, and turned my memo into memories.

