# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

---



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Sophocles wrote: “One must wait until the evening to see how splendid the day has been.” In the evening of my incredibly fortunate career in the NFL, I can now say the days have been splendid, mostly because of the many people who helped along the way. If I’m honest, the following printed thank-yous don’t begin to represent how strongly I feel them in my heart. But here goes.

First and foremost, I want to extend my sincerest thanks and most profound love to my wife, Millie; my two sons, Mick and Matthew, and their beautiful wives, Michelle and Julie; and my two remarkable grandsons, Dominic Anthony and Leo Stanley. Without Millie, there would be no family and no book. Through the years, she has made so many sacrifices for the good of our family with love and incredible support; I could not have found a better life-loving partner. And I am blessed to call my two boys my best friends. I cannot wait to watch them as they fill out their football careers.

Because she was the first person to encourage me to read and write, I want to thank my mother, Jane, who would have been beyond excited to open this book. Writing it reminded me of my childhood, of the way she pushed me to chase my dreams. For that, I will be forever grateful. Also, thanks to my 91-year-old father, Mike, who still cuts hair every day, continuing to demonstrate the incredible work ethic I can only try to duplicate; to my in-laws who have since passed away, Big Stosh and Lucille, as they always made me feel like their son and supported my every move (of which there were plenty); and to my brothers-in-law Mike Kluzinski (with his wife, Yeimy, and my niece Michelle), and the late Stanley Kluzinski, who always cheered loudly.

To my sisters, Marie and Annette; Marie’s husband, Tom; Annette’s daughter, Brianna: thank you. Thanks to my uncle Mike Palermo, who passed away this year, as well as his wife, Betty, for being guiding influences throughout my life. So, too, to my cousin Vince Lombardi, his deceased wife, Nina, and their children, Alyssa, Nick, and Joe, as well as Susan. They’ve always been my most loyal fans. And to the self-proclaimed mayor of the boardwalk in Ocean City, New Jersey, Sal Deldeo, and his wife, Barbara, who passed away last year, I owe sincere thank-yous and appreciation for their never-ending support, as well as to my aunt Gloria.

Speaking of great support, the entire Nolan family has given me much-needed help in many ways: Pat, Bernadette, Justin, Melissa, Katie, Mike, Patrick, Michael, Vincent, and Lilly have become my extended family. The Barry family—my second mother, Marie; her deceased husband, Gerry; and their entire family—have been a real source of encouragement and support. As have the Bradys, from Paul to Susan to Leah to Shane to Jake, as well as the Galantes: Tony, Janet, Joey, and Michael. The Lindquist family: Kurt, Mary, Jeff, Emily, and Cadan; the Greene family: Bobby, Genny, and James; and finally the Baxters: Rick, Debbie, Chelsea, Kyle, Lindsay, and Courtney—a heartfelt thank-you to all.

Some thanks need to be extended to others who passed away before this book became a reality. Their impact on my life has been everlasting: Mike Salveski and Roger Sicoli, my high school coaches; Bob Karmelowicz and Bob Owens at UNLV, my first coaching mentors; Ernie Plank, the former 49ers scout who treated me like a son and shared his wisdom; Tony Razzano, the man who hired me in San Francisco, as well as the Niners scouts Neil Schmidt, Bob Whitman, and Billy Wilson, all of whom were so very generous with their knowledge; Allen Webb, the 49ers pro personnel director, who was forever answering my annoying questions and helped me learn how to study football; Bobb McKittrick, the team’s offensive line coach, whose lessons about pass protection schemes I still remember; Norb Hecker, a Packers assistant under Vince Lombardi, who was as kind and helpful as his movie hero John Wayne was manly; Robert Albo, Raiders team doctor, one of the most caring men with one of the hardest handshakes; Browns owner Art Modell, who was funny and generous and always called me “kid,” which I loved; and Dom Anile, head coach at C. W. Post and director of personnel for the Colts and Panthers, who helped us develop Cleveland’s grading and player procurement systems. Joel Buchsbaum was the first draftnik to become my friend and a source of valuable information. I still miss him and often reach for the phone to call his 718 exchange during draft time.

It goes without saying, but I’ll type it nonetheless, that this book would not have been possible without Bill Walsh, who let me inside what is arguably the most important organization in the modern football era and taught me so much about so many aspects of the game and leadership. I am likewise indebted to Al Davis, for bringing me into his vaunted organization. Both men affected my life substantially, and their impact is manifest on every page of this book.

My career changed on February 5, 1991, when Bill Belichick was named the head coach of the Browns. Our professional partnership and our personal friendship over the past 25 years have been as enriching as they have been rewarding, which is saying something. Imagine the good fortune at being able to call the greatest coach of all time my friend.

I want to acknowledge some other coaches I played for along the way—for their patience, passion, and willingness to teach the game: Ed Woolley, Bill Leete, Micky Kwiatkowski, Frank Guthridge, Jim Burner, and John Cervino. All my teammates at Ocean City High School, Valley Forge Military Academy, and Hofstra University deserve thanks as well, but in particular: Glen Wagner, Carmen Costanza, Johnny Cervino, Al Burch, Rick Moretti, Jim Chadwick, Joe Tyrell, Mike Ricketts, Fred Serino, Joe Buontempo, Dennis Pezzolesi, Peter Barcia, Frank Bianchini, Rich Petillo, Bud Rinck, and Ira Smith.

I wrote so many letters to college head coaches from my dorm room at Hofstra that I must have been annoying to many. But each letter I sent to then Florida State head coach Bobby Bowden was always returned with a kind word. I never worked for Bowden, but I will always remember his encouragement. And another person I have tried to meet and thank personally for his words and inspirations is “The Boss,” Bruce Springsteen. I have been backstage numerous times to thank him, and each time I’ve come up short. Therefore, since it may never happen, I must thank him on these pages, because without his musical advice I might never have had that meeting across the river, or ever crossed Highway Nine.

In Las Vegas, Harvey Hyde at UNLV was like a second father to me, and not just because he gave me my first paying job in football. Others at UNLV who deserve my gratitude are Ron Mims, Barry Lamb, Pat Hill, Scott O’Brien, Al Tanara, Randy Whitsitt, Tim Wilson, Tim Grugrich, and Mark Warkentein.

In San Francisco, as you might imagine, the list of those who lent me a hand in one way or another is long. It starts with Hall of Fame owner Edward J. DeBartolo Jr. At my first-ever Super Bowl, he saw that my parents were with me at the game, ripped my tickets out of my hand, and replaced them with three much-improved seats. His generosity is legendary, with good reason. Others deserving thanks are John McVay, Carmen Policy, John Galetka, Paul Hackett, George Seifert, Bill McPherson, Ray Rhodes, Neal Dahlan, Fred von Appen, Mike Holmgren, Sherman Lewis, Jerry Walker, Rodney Knox, Bronco Hinek, and Tommy Hart.

Many players on the Niners were also patient with a kid trying to become a scout: Joe Montana, Matt Cavanaugh, Dwight Clark, Roger Craig, Mike Wilson, Randy Cross, Guy McIntyre, Keith Fahnhorst, Dwaine Board, Manu Tuiasosopo, Michael Carter, Ronnie Lott, Eric Wright, Keena Turner, and the great Charles Haley, to name a few.

In Cleveland, general manager Ernie Accorsi taught me the inner workings of a front office. Marty Schottenheimer, head coach at the time, made every team he guided better. Other Cleveland-era shout-outs go to Bill Cowher, Howard Mudd, Joe Pendry, Kurt Schottenheimer, Kirk Ferentz, Mike Sheppard, Richard Mann, Gary Tranquill, Steve Crosby, Ernie Adams, Kevin Spencer, Jim Bates, Al Groh, Jacob Burney, Woody Widenhofer, Jerry Simmons, Jim Schwartz, Eric Mangini, Ozzie Newsome, Scott Pioli, Tom Dimitroff, Thomas Dimitroff, Gary Horton, John Lombardi, Ellis Rainsberger, Phil Savage, Pat Moore, Sam Deluca, Dan Sagney, and George Kokinis. My one year working for the Haslam family was too short, and I wished things would have been different, but the Haslams were kind, were generous to my family, and deserve my recognition, starting with Big Jim Haslam, Jimmy, Dee, Steve, and Ann Bailey. Thank you.

My time with the Browns was also the beginning of my invaluable relationship with Nick Saban, from whom I’ve learned so much, and Rick Venturi, who helped me as I wrote this book when my memory failed. Venturi knows football as well as any human on the planet, and I cherish our conversations. And my friendship with Jerry Angelo gave me many scouting tips and helped me learn about life on the road.

In Philadelphia, Eagles owner Jeffrey Lurie entrusted me to run his 1998 draft with help from Bryan Broaddus, a dear friend, as well as Bobby Depaul, Dan Shonka, Sean Payton, David Shaw, Danny Smith, Mike Trgovac, John Harbaugh, and Emmitt Thomas—what a privilege. Joe Banner, who hired me in Philadelphia and Cleveland, is one of the smartest men I have worked with during my time in the NFL.

In Oakland, Al Davis was far from the only person who made a difference. I enjoyed working with Amy Trask, Dan Ventrelle, Rod Martin, Scotty Toucet, Ed Dodds, Jack Barhite, Sherratt Reicher, Pete Caracciolo, Mark Artega, Paul Kelly, Chet Franklin, Jim and John Otten, Mike Ornstein, Dave Nash, Tom Delaney, and the late great George “Run Run” Jones, who made every day in Raiderland a treat. Also, Bill Callahan (still one of my favorite coaches to watch work), Jon Gruden, Mike Waufle, Ron Lynn, Chuck Pagano, Don Martindale, Rob Ryan, Norv Turner, John Morton, Aaron Kromer, Jim Harbaugh, Skip Peete, Willie Brown, Jeff Fish, Garrett Giemont, Chuck Bresnahan, Bob Casullo, Fred Pagac, Gary Stephans, Fred Biletnikoff, Marc Trestman, Jim McElwain, Bill Romanowski, John Shoop, and, of course, my dear friend and summertime partner, Rich Gannon. But the most profound impact came from my friendship with Marc Badain, the current Raiders president. Badain has always been smart and funny, and like the little brother I never had.

In New England, there are so many to recognize, starting with owner Robert Kraft, and his sons, Jonathan and Dan. Then there’s Josh McDaniels, Chad O’Shea, Ivan Fears, Dave “Guge” DeGugliemimo, Brian Daboll, Matt Patricia, Pat Graham, Steven Belichick, Brian Flores, Josh Boyer, Brandan Daly, Dante Scarnecchia, Joe Judge, Jack Easterby, Nick Cesario, Harold Nash, Moses Cabera, Jerry Schuplinski, Nick Caley, Nancy Meier, Monti Ossenfort, Matt Groh, Brian Smith, Bob Quinn, James Lipfert, Dujuan Daniels, Tim Heffelfinger, Jonathan Howard, Frank Ross, David Ziegler, Patrick Stewart, Ronnie McGill, Steve Cargile, Berj Najarian, Jim Whalen, Joe Van Allen, Ted Harper, Brandon Murphy and his grandfather Murph, Jimmy Dee, Fernando Neto, Jared Rita, Teddy Ciopper, and Brandon Yeargan.

I owe thanks to all the players representing the Patriots during my time in New England, starting with the hardest-working and most dedicated athlete I have ever watched work, Tom Brady. Brady is a megastar with a humble manner, and I appreciate his friendship, as well as that of Julian Edelman, who was always asking how he could become a better receiver. Each member of those teams during my two-plus-year-stay in New England are worthy of my sincere and humble thank-you. A fantastic group of men.

For their encouragement and support throughout the dangerous process of writing, I’d like to thank Gary Belsky and Neil Fine; they were terrific. Jim Nantz has been a cherished friend, adviser, and supporter, for which I am eternally grateful. I often say, as nice as Nantz appears on television, he is even nicer in person, if that is even possible. Thanks also to Shane Parrish, Tom Crean, Bob Boland, Ken Scigulinsky, Jay Kelleher, Will Hill, Jimmy Sexton, Greg Schiano, Earl Myers, Mike Gottfried, Sean Sweeney, Fran Frascella, Eric Musselman, Gil Brandt, Rick Gosselin, Dr. Anthony, Dr. Steven, Ryan Holiday, and Peter Abate for their friendship and wisdom. My editor, Mary Reynics, has been a great resource and helping hand, but she wouldn’t have had anything to do if my agent, David Larabell, hadn’t first made this book happen. I owe much to Bill Simmons for his guidance, and to my podcast partner, Tate Frazier, video producer Joel Solomon, and all the others at The Ringer. I genuinely appreciate their support. And this section would not be complete without my many thanks and love to Bella and Lana, who were with me each step of the writing process—albeit with a few cookies and walking breaks.

I reserve final thanks to Peter Kaufman, whose magnanimous generosity, kind spirit, and enthusiasm for knowledge allowed me to write this book. Peter, who spends his life helping others, has helped me more than I can express.

