# Section 6

---



Page 6

In the 14 years that I've been at Florida State, we've lost four National Championships because we didn't finish. We couldn't finish the fourth quarter. I would be surprised if there was another team in the country that outworked us this year. We had the same thing come up this year in our bowl game. We were playing for a National Championship. We looked at the results and evaluated our play. I don't think there was anything wrong with our effort. We got outskilled, out-big played, outcoached, and outfought a few times. Those are the things you want to make sure don't happen very often if you plan on being successful. We may not be in the hunt for the championship next fall. We have to replace eight starters on defense. We had a very good defense this year. Our kids did a whale of a job of fighting back and getting pride back in our defense. We will be good on defense next year, but I don't know how quick it will be. We open up with Southern Cal next year at their place. We better be pretty good when we get there.

We have a lot to accomplish in our off-season, spring, and summer practices. I really believe this. It doesn't have anything to do with X's and O's. There is a place for that kind of thinking, but you better not depend on winning games against people who are as good as you are with physical talent. It takes more than that. The thing we are trying to accomplish in spring training is to win with good people who will give great effort, play with great fundamentals, and finish the game. We try not to get to caught up with X's and O's. You win championships in the off-season. From when you put the pads away until they come out again is when you win championships. That is when you work on the mental phases of the game. That is when you work on some critical things that have nothing to do with blocking and tackling. I'm going to show you our defense. The success we had was not the X's and O's. It was our players' attitude, character, will to prepare, and will to do the things we ask them to do. It is not easy for the coach or player. If your players will pay in the off-season, that's what helps you win on Saturday. That is where the fun comes in and makes it all worthwhile. I was recruiting this year in a high school in Florida. I saw this on a coach's bulletin board. I thought it was neat and applied to what we were trying to accomplish in our off-season. It was called "The Law of Survival": "Every morning the gazelle awakens knowing he has to outrun the fastest lion to survive. Every morning the lion wakes knowing he has to run faster than the slowest gazelle or he will starve. It doesn't make any difference whether you are a lion or a gazelle. When the sun comes up, you better be running." That kind of tells the story of our off-season program.

I don't think you have to get up at six in the morning to be successful. That is not the magic we've had at Florida State. The reason we started working at six in the morning was because of the players' academic requirements. We could have worked at night, but we felt the morning was better. It makes the players get up. Also, we have a lot of kids that play other sports, and this time doesn't interfere with their practice time. I have one kid that will be a starter on the baseball team as a freshman. We have six kids that run on the track team. They go through our off-season program in the mornings and the track practice in the afternoon. The morning time gives our kids an opportunity to play more than one sport. The only time that these guys miss off-season workouts is when they have a game. Every defensive back I've had has played baseball or run track.

After we get through with the bowl game every year, we sit down as a coaching staff and list some things that we want to accomplish next year. We sit down with our players and sell them on these things. The one thing we want to sell to the player is to become a champion. If our player develops a championship attitude, we won't have to worry about him. He won't be getting into trouble.

We set down four things as goals. When I first went to Florida State, they had only one goal: That was to win the National Championship. In the first five years the closest we got was about 60th. We weren't even close. We decided to set some goals that we could reach. By doing that, we could reach other goals. We are in a state where the National Championship has been won 5 times out of the last 10 years. Miami, Florida, and Florida State have played in many other National Championship games and have not won.

 

