# Section 9

---



Page 9

But both of them bought into the scheme that we were going to turn them loose to go to the ball. Their eyes lit up. We've been doing this for a number of years. We tell our two inside people to penetrate. We want them to move the line of scrimmage. Their aiming point is to get a foot behind the line of scrimmage. We want all backs to have to cut laterally. I don't have time to get into our block reaction. Basically, we are trying to take four guys and form a new line of scrimmage. At one time we played our linebackers five yards deep to attack the line of scrimmage. We went for a visit to Nebraska. We changed a lot of our thinking about the 4-3. A lot the things we do we got from Nebraska. Also, we went to Washington and Arizona. We tried to take different things people were doing and incorporate them into what we are doing. Don't take people and try to bend them into what you want to do. One of the best things you can do as a coach is to take your people and adjust your scheme to your people. Offensive people have been doing that for years. If they have a great option quarterback, they run the option. If he can drop-back pass, they do that. Don't put people into situations where they cannot be successful. Take what you have, and put them into the best situation for them.

We now use an "up call" to get our linebackers up to the line of scrimmage. We had three middle linebackers who had to be our linebacking corps last year. We put Bush in the middle and moved the other two to the outside. They were more effective playing up to the line of scrimmage, so we put them up there. I think both of those outside linebackers will make it into pro ball: one because he has great ability, and one because he has a big heart. They'll make it because it means enough to them. The middle linebacker we had this year was one of the smartest guys I've ever been around. I heard someone say that he was so smart that it was like trying to sneak daylight by a rooster. It just doesn't happen. I can tell from that reaction that most of you guys in here were raised in town. Most of you haven't heard that rooster early in the morning.

We started off as a quarter-quarter-half team in the secondary. After the fourth football game in 1993, we changed to quarter-quarter across the board. That was a good coverage for the personnel we had. This past year our personnel did not allow us to play zone coverage as well as we played man coverage. Therefore we played a little more man coverage last year. The main thing we wanted to do was get seven men up on the line of scrimmage and make the offensive linemen account for linebackers. If a linebacker is back deep, the offensive linemen are not worried about him blitzing. If he is up on the feet of the defensive line, they get worried. We tell our linebackers that they can run through anytime they want as long as they can make the play. Most linebackers want to blitz every play. But if he runs through and doesn't make the play, he is going to get his butt chewed out. We can't stand him making bad decisions, but by being on the line of scrimmage, he confuses a lot of blocking schemes.

These are the alignments we used. Our defensive end plays a wide 9 technique and has a 7-gap responsibility. The defensive end to the split end lines up in a wide 5 technique and has a 5-gap responsibility. All four linemen key the ball. We want them to get up as close to the line as they can. We got a bunch of off-sides calls this year. We were the most penalized team in the ACC this year. I'm not bragging because Coach Bowden says penalties are coaching mistakes. You eliminate penalties with good coaching. He's right because he is the boss. I don't believe you can be aggressive on defense and not get penalties. We got a lot of criticism against Florida for hitting late, but we got penalized twice for it. I don't want my defensive ends wondering whether the quarterback still has the ball or not. I want them coming hard, not holding back. If we've got a guy pinned against the sideline and the whistle hasn't blown, hit him. That back should not be running out of bounds. We don't teach dirty ball. Bobby Bowden doesn't, and he would fire anybody who did. But we do teach hard-nosed ball. As long as that guy has our ball, we are going to try to get it. It's all in how you look at it.

The tackle is in a 3 technique to the tight end and has a 3-gap responsibility. The nose guard is in a 2 eye on the guard to the split end side. He has the 1-gap-weak responsibility. Our linebacker aligns tight to the line. The strong linebacker is in a 7 technique on the tight end and has the 7-gap responsibility. The middle

 

