# Section 134

---



Page 134

As he gets into the season and into game planning, he must have a complete vision of what that defense looks like on 1st and 10, 2nd and short, or 3rd and long. If he can't do that, he is in trouble. If he has to go to a play book, it will be a tough year. If you go to your defensive coordinator and ask him what he is going to do on 3rd and 10 against North Alabama and he can't tell you, then he is not ready to be your defensive coordinator.

The best thing I can tell the young coaches here today is this: You must study the game. You cannot have a good vision of what things should look like until you study the game. It is great that you are here at this clinic. It is great that you go visit colleges. At UK we will be open to the coaches, and you can come anytime you want to. We are going to have a totally open-door policy. I think you should come to see us, but I think you should go other places as well. You need to spend a lot of time educating yourself on your particular aspect of the game. As this carries over to the head coach, he must be able to do all of these things.

The head coach must have a vision of what his offense is going to look like, what his defense is going to look like, and what his special teams are going to look like. That is the game. Then you get into other aspects of the game. How are you going to handle academics? How are you going to handle discipline? What are the boundaries that you are going to draw?

One of the problems we are having to deal with is this: There are no hard lines for our young people. Everything is a fine line or a gray area. There is not much right or wrong anymore. At UK we have some ideas about discipline. We are not going to let our players cross the boundaries. Now, that does not mean that we have to be very regimented. We are not a very regimented staff, and we do not run a very regimented program. We are going to have a lot of discipline. There are certain things they will not be allowed to do. If you steal, you cannot play for the Cats. If you do drugs, you cannot play for the Cats. If you beat up on your wife or girlfriend, you cannot play for the Cats. There are some other items that I deal with concerning our players. The point I want to make is that I have the process all thought out. I can walk through the office door and sit at that desk and wait for the next problem to happen. If I am in the office 150 days, I can promise you there will be at least 149 days when there is a problem ringing on the other end of that phone. That is what head coaches must be able to do-handle problems. If you do not have a concrete plan about your discipline, when the phone rings, you are grasping for straws. You are not sure how to handle the situation. If you have thought all of this out ahead of time, all you have to do is to make the decisions and to solve the problems on the other end of the phone. It is not always discipline. It could be academics, boosters, fund-raising, budgets, and other things. If you are going to be the head coach, you must have an idea what you are going to do about this. What are you going to do in the off-season? Who is going to be in charge of that part of the program? How are you going to handle it, and how are you going to approach it? When are you going to have spring practice? If you want to be a head coach, you must have a clear vision about all of those aspects. When those problems walk through your door every day, you do not have to dream up a new way of dealing with the problems.

The best thing I can tell you about the update of UK football is that we do have those things covered. We do not have a lot of players, so to speak. We do have a tremendous schedule. We do have a lot of enthusiasm about recruiting in Kentucky and every area that we can. We are going to recruit the southwest part of Ohio and the state of Kentucky as one area. One of our assistants will have that area, and he will cover every school in that area. We will know where every player is from the ninth grade up in that area. That is our goal over the next two years.

From there we are going to position-recruit in Texas, Georgia, Florida, New Jersey, and Samoa. Some of you may laugh when we say Samoa. We have had a player from Samoa every year. We were late this year and did not get a player from there. We will go any place we have to go to recruit. We feel we have great ties in these areas. I will send the position coach to those areas to recruit those players. If it is an offensive lineman, I will send Coach Guy Morriss, our offensive line coach. That is my vision of how to recruit. If we can convince the people in the area of southwest Ohio

 

