# Section 140

---



Page 140

This is how we taught the quarterback to do what we wanted. We took our starters and lined them up in the formation. We took all of the other players who thought they were quarterbacks and put them on defense. They were the Will, Mike, and Sam linebackers. We put the extra receivers out wide. All this for us is a walk-through. We put the ball in the quarterback's hands. I stood behind the offense where the quarterback could not see me. I would motion to one of the defenders to move. I would have one defender drop too deep or come up tight. The job of the quarterback was to give the one-word call and throw the ball to the right receiver. The next time, I would have the defense do something different. The quarterback had to react to the defense, make his call, and throw the ball to the right man. By the time we got to the end of the two-a-day practices, all of our quarterbacks knew how to locate the underneath defenders. As we got better at it, we would put a couple of defenders back deep as safeties. We were able to get them to locate the linebacker, corners, and safeties. If the quarterback can locate those seven defenders for you really quickly, it is easy to sort out the other four defenders. This was just a mental drill we did.

The other thing we had to do was this. We did not have fast people. After the receiver caught the pass, we had to do something to make sure we gained yards. If you were a running team and could average 5 yards per carry, I am sure you would feel good about it. This is what we told our wide receiver to do after he caught the short pass. We did not want him to duck and dodge or shake and bake. We wanted him to make 5 yards straight ahead. Then God would tell him where to go after that. The main emphasis was to catch the ball and get upfield. How do you teach this? This sounds easy to do, and everyone says that. But how do you do that day after day, week after week, so that it works? For warm-up, this is what we do. We got rid of the stretching. I wanted to practice two hours or less. I felt that was all we could get out of them. The players and parents loved this. I did not like the stretching drills when I played. Have you ever seen a dog get up off of the front porch and stretch before he chases a car? If he is going to chase a car, he is going to go chase the car. If you are going to play football, you come ready to play football. Football is not a sport where you need to do a lot of different things to train. The way to get ready to play football is to put on your equipment and go out and play football. We came up with this warmup drill. We are going to spend 10 to 15 minutes each day doing this drill. We are going to be warmed up. We are not going to be tight. We have a line just before they get to our practice field. When they cross the line, we let them know that they have come to practice. We are really serious about it. "Men, this is not softball practice." If you are a receiver, you come over and get in the receivers' line. We get the quarterbacks in another line. We give the quarterbacks the "drop of the day." It may be a five- or three-step drop. The quarterback works on his footwork on the lines. He takes the snap and comes back on the line. The receivers jog toward the dummies. They end up closer to one dummy than the other dummy. The quarterback throws the ball at the number opposite the dummy. The quarterback wants to keep the ball below the dummy. The drill represents what happens in a game. The dummy represents the linebackers. After the receiver catches the ball, we want him to turn and head straight upfield. It is a warm-up drill. He can jog straight up the field.

Now, we go back to our philosophy: Throw short as many times as possible to people who can score. We are trying to put X, Y, Z, H, and F in positions to score. We do two drills that we can do every day and not get bored. If you come to watch us practice, you will see that we have only four running plays and five passes, and we have our quick game, which I have described to you today. That is pretty much it, men. We have a zillion sets. We are going to use the one that puts our guys in the right position. We are going to put them in

 

