# Section 158

---



Page 158

movement that we do in the weight room with weights is with jumping. A squat is a very slow jumping movement. It is all jumping and running. When you played hopscotch when you were six years old or when you jump rope, it is still jumping. We are just going to get more fancy with it. We are going to clean and jerk, and we are going to do single-leg squats. We do not do front squats. Most of our guys are built for speed, and they are long from the hips to their neck. If we try to put the bar up high, it gives them trouble, because on the clean it puts the bar under their throat. They can't lift with the bar on their throat. They have to hold the bar off their throat. For that reason, we do not do them. You have to spend so much time, we just do not do them. That is the reason we went to the single-leg squat.

We are going to elevate our back leg on something. We have benches beside our squat racks. The key is this: The front leg cannot be back more than the knee or even with the knee. If you do not do that, you will start opening your hips up, and you put a lot of pressure on the SI joints. You will have players with SI joint problems. Just as when you do a lunge, you want the front foot turned in just a little for balance and stability.

Then you go to this position with the knee even with the back knee, or the other knee. The rules are the same as in squatting. It is big breath, sit, and come back up. I am not going to get the top of the thigh parallel, because it is almost impossible. That is all right. I will get to hamstring parallel. That brings the ham into play. Our load is going to be fairly light. We are going to move down slowly and up quickly. Our guys who were squatting 500 pounds had trouble starting with 135 pounds on this drill, but now we have players who will do 180 to 200 on this. We keep the reps low: two to four reps. If you start doing six, seven, or eight reps, they will constantly get sore in their butt. They get sore in the butt, they get tight in their ham, and their back gets tight. We keep the reps low. We keep the weight conservative. We do not want anyone struggling on it. We want good movement. We want to move the weight down slowly and up quickly. That is called compensatory acceleration. You can overload them with more weight, more reps, or more speed. In this lift we use a combination of all three. We always finish fast.

Now we are going to go over and do power step-ups. We are going to go unloaded to a bench. As I stomp on the bench, I drive up in the air. Where is this important? It is the first get-away step in sprinting. It is very important in football. How many steps do the offensive linemen get? One and then contact. He needs to come off the ball harder and faster. It is the first step, the get-away step. It is key, key, key! We want to finish fast.

So, we do single-leg squats, we do power step-ups, we do hang cleans, and we do jerks. After single-leg jerks, I do not feel comfortable taking players out on the field and sprinting them for 40 yards. When you get a lot of single-leg work going or a lot of lateral agilities going, you can irritate their lower back. It is not ''Oh, coach, I hurt my back," but their SI joint gets out of whack. It is just like when you are running straight ahead in the middle of the season and they have had no problems, then one day you hear one of them say, "Coach, I pulled a groin." How can you pull a groin running straight ahead? They have been training for weeks. How can they do it? It is because of the back. The back gets out of whack.

If any of you have ever been to a chiropractor, he will tell you something like this: "Your hips are out of alignment, and you have one leg shorter than the other leg." Well, that really can't happen. If you get your hips out of alignment and have one higher than the other, now you are pulling unevenly on the muscle. You are running straight ahead, and the groin pulls. That is because it has an uneven stress on it. It is a muscle imbalance. We all know that the quad-to-ham ratio causes hamstring pulls and all of that. You can also have an imbalance just because the muscle is being stressed or stretched. It can be stressed from front to back and other ways. For those reasons, I do not feel comfortable sprinting them on Tuesday. We go out and work on stance and starts. We do them for 10 to 15 yards. On Monday we will do 8 to 16 of the 10- to 15yard stance and starts. We run forward and laterally using the crossover step, pulls, and all kinds of stuff.

 

