# Section 160

---



Page 160

is a recovery day. On Thursday I am strong, and I am lifting weights. What is left for Friday? I can't be fast; I can't be powerful; I can't be strong. All I can do is work.

On Friday we do fitness. We do circuits. We get our freshmen in, or we are in the off-season and they are being red-shirted. We can do some of this three days a week with our non-travel players. We tell our skill players that they must learn to like Thursday. What do skilled players do in high school? They play three sports, usually. They play football, basketball, and baseball or track. When did they ever lift heavy weights? They may have done a little bench press. So we tell our skilled players that they must learn to like Thursday. When we do fitness on Friday, they just fly through it, because they are already in shape. It is easy for them, because they do not weigh very much. The big guys like Thursday. Ha! Dumbbell, bench, squats. Friday, they are sick. They just don't know if they can make it.

Steve Javorick coached our Olympic weight-lifting coach when our Olympic coach was a lifter for Romania. He got a silver medal in Los Angeles. Steve's thing is this: The more fit you are, the more work you can do; the more work you can do, the more quality work you can do. He invented something called dumbbell fitness training. If I had a pair of dumbbells, I would use 10 percent of my weight if I weighed 178 pounds. Now, this will not work for the heavy guys, because they will have more fat on them. They have to go 10 percent of their fat-free weight. We figured that out for all of our players. For most of the young guys, you can give them a set weight, but if I had a partner up here and we were going to do a dumbbell fitness workout on Friday, this is how we would do it.

We put a chart up that shows 8 to 12 exercises. It has quarter 1 and the number of reps. Then it has quarter 2 and the number of reps. Then comes quarter 3 and the reps, quarter 4 and the reps, and the overtime and the reps. If you are my partner, you are up here with me. We are working with 22 1/2 pound dumbbells. I look up at the chart, and it says 10 hang snatches. Now, I have 24 players lined up. We have 12 working and 12 watching. The first man is up. Ready, go! He does 10 hang snatches. As soon as he gets to number 10, he sets the dumbbells down, the other man picks them up, and he does 10. It is just like football. Work, rest, work, rest.

Now, the first man picks up the dumbbells, and he has 10 squat push-presses. He goes to 10 and then sets them down. The second man is up. What does he have? He has 16 step-ups on one leg. He does 16 and then switches legs. He does the 16, and the next man is up. We get 8 to 12 exercises done in the first quarter. It is like a mat drill, only it is with weight and you do not go anywhere. The first time we do it, you can find out who has courage and who doesn't. The ones who do not have courage count like this: 8, 10,14, 16, coach. Then you have to start counting for them. "Two more." "But, coach!" "You have two more." Just start counting their reps. It is easy to cheat. It is toughness training. That is all it is. It is will-power training. You are competing with the man in the mirror. You can make it really hard, or you can make it really easy. Our guys love Friday. The first day that our new coach Dave Roberts, who came from Notre Dame, saw us work out was on a Friday. We were doing fitness work. He though that it was great. If he had come in on Monday with the players doing snatching and doing a few jumps, he would have said that we had too many players standing around. Fortunately he came in on Friday. He thought it was great. We had the players yelling and talking it up. We were doing what we think is great in football. The players know that they must get ready for Friday on Thursday. They know Friday is going to be tough. You can do any kind of movements that you want. It can be side lunges, or lateral step-ups. It goes on forever. We end up with about 300 reps on Friday. You will get some fitness out of this. You can get players bigger in a heartbeat with this. Think of all the reps. What gets you bigger in body building? Reps. That is a bunch of reps on Friday. We may do giant sets that are similar to circuits.

That is what we do for our workouts in a day. We have to finish fast with a similar movement. We always have to finish with running. If you can't run, you can't play. After we finish squatting, we will go out and do six of the 130s. On the first 130, they are running slow because they have just finished squatting. Now, on the

 

