# Section 207

---



Page 207

Good ball technique to us is this: The finger is over the point of the ball. The elbow is ready to pin the back point of the ball to the rib cage if you are in the open field. If you are sprinting for a score, you can have great arm action. Anytime they are in a dangerous situation or at linebackers' level or stepping over a player, we ask them to roll the ball in front of their breast plate a little. What we are doing is removing the surface of the ball from the defender. Now the defense does not have anything to grab. The linebacker can get his hat on the ball, but it is not going anywhere. You cannot see the ball from behind. We never have two hands on the ball going through the line of scrimmage. We have one hand on the ball. You are not the same back when you run with two hands on the ball as you are with one hand on the ball, where you still have great balance. It is basically the same position or area where you would carry the ball with two hands, but we want only one hand on the ball in front of the chest plate. I can secure the ball here with one hand. I can control the ball from that position. Our backs get confident in this position. I am not going to tell you that every time our backs get the ball, they have the ball on the chest plate or tucked in on the side. Ideally, that is what you want to happen. That is not always going to be the case. We know that, but that is our job, to talk to the backs about good ball techniques. We remind them to roll the ball forward, keep it high and tight, and use some terms that they will be able to identify with. So we always start out our drills working on good ball techniques.

I always watch team work from behind the offense. If I see a lot of the ball from that position or if he is flagging the ball as he comes back to the huddle, I give him some reminders to keep the ball high and tight. I will suggest that they roll the ball forward a little more. I want to make positive remarks to them about ball techniques. I do not want to talk to them in negative terms. They are getting hit up about good ball technique all the way through practice, from the start of practice with drill work all the way up to team work. We were in the top five in the country in turnover ratio this year, and we run an option offense. Two years ago, we were pressing to be number one in turnover ratio in the country. This tells me that we do not put the ball on the ground that much. We take good care of the football. When you are running an option offense, you have a lot of concern about turnovers because there is a lot of risk in running the option game. If your backs start putting the ball on the ground, then you have major problems.

When they come to start the drills, we have 10 rectangular bags that are flat on the ground. The backs come over and get a football. The first thing we are going to do is to step over the bags using good ball technique. This drill takes at the most a minute and one half to go through, but we do not miss a day of this drill. We are going to get three or four things accomplished in this drill.

I had one coach visit our practice. He asked me what we did with our backs in our drills. Before I answered him, he told me that he did not like bag drills. He went on to tell me that he felt they were a waste of time. But I disagree. If you are a basketball player and you go three or four months without bouncing a basketball, you will be rusty when you come back to the game. It is the same as catching a football. If you are used to catching the football 20 to 30 times a day in practice, and then you take a month off, it will not be as natural to catch the football if you take a month off and then come back out to catch those passes. We think running with the football is the same.

We go over the bags every day. We have them go through them three times. First, they step through each bag with one foot. I am not concerned about them getting from point A to point B as fast as they can. I am interested in high knees going over the bags. I am interested in ball techniques as they go through the bags. As soon as they go over that first bag, they get high knees, and that ball gets rolled forward in front of their breast plate. That is a dangerous situation at this point. That ball is high and tight. We are stepping over a man on the ground. I can show you on tape 30 or 40 times a season when our backs have to step over someone. It may be a defender, or it may be one of our players. We are working on ball techniques and high knees.

 

