# Section 214

---



Page 214

start things, but frequently you do not know how to finish them. One of the things that helped us when I was with the 49ers when we were successful was this. Our players knew how to play to a standard of play, they knew how to concentrate through out, and they knew how to finish.

There are three musts for our program to be successful. First, we must be able to teach and maximize concentration for our athletes. Second, they must know how to practice with intensity. Practice basically is a dress rehearsal for the game. Practicing is critically important. In our sport, in this day and age, we only have 20 hours to prepare our athletes. Three of those hours are devoted to the game, so we have only 17 hours to practice. If we do not maximize their concentration, get them to practice with intensity, and build some concept of finish, then we are in trouble.

One of the places we start is in our team meetings. Let me stress the importance that we put on the reaction to the meeting setting. We tell our players that if we have a meeting, there is a reason for it. If we step before you, we have something of importance that is germane to the sport that we need to get across to you. It is imperative that we get your attention. I have neatness as the number one thing. We are talking about conduct and decorum in the meeting setting. If you do not get what you ask for in that setting, you are not going to get it on the practice field.

It all starts with meeting and how you practice. That will determine how you are going to play in the game. When you come into a meeting, the room is going to look a certain way. When you leave, it should look the same way. We do not want a lot of spit cups, apple cores, or other garbage left behind. If we had the room set up a certain way, we want you to leave it that way. It is the same in the dressing room. We cannot have jocks, shoes, helmets, cups, and other things left all over the locker room. We are going to police the area. Basically, it is a reflection of the players' attitude. If we do not police it properly and pay attention to it, then we probably are not getting the results in other areas as well. Football transcends the field. It goes into the locker room, the training room, the weight room, and the meeting room that we use.

When we go into a meeting room, we expect the players to come in and seat themselves, put their feet on the floor, sit up straight, rivet their eyes on the speaker, and listen and hear. There is a difference. Those of you who are married know that your wives insist that you do not know the difference in listening and hearing. "You hear, but you do not listen!" Kids are great at this. They must give up their eyes. Posture tells us something about their learning attitude. It should be no different from the classroom sitting. We expect our players to sit up. We do not want them to put their feet up on the chair in front of them. We do not expect them to drape their feet over the shoulders of the man in front of them. We do not want them in a posture that is not receptive to learning, so, "Park your rear end in the chair, sit up straight in the saddle, rivet your eyes on the speaker, listen and hear, look and see." You are not guaranteed that you are getting the player's attention all of the time just because he is looking at you or just because he appears to be hearing you. He may be daydreaming about another coed somewhere on campus, but you will not know. But you have a chance, and it is important that you police that chance. That is part of our responsibility. If I have a player whose eyes are wandering around the room, he may be looking at something else, and he may be asleep.

Neatness is another thing that is important. It should not look as if the volunteer fire department just responded to a call after the meeting is over. We reset the chairs, pick up the garbage, and put the room back as it was. Then they can get their happy butts out to practice. During that setting, they should have given us their eyes and ears. It is important that we police that and get it. You get what you ask for. Anytime you are in a meeting setting and you are not comfortable with that setting, you are the one at fault, not the players. If the players' eyes are not on you, get their damn eyes on you. If you do not think a player is listening, get his attention. Turn the volume up, and get his attention. It is important not to lose any one of those swinging Richards in that room during that meeting. What you are imparting in that meeting they are going to put into practical application on the field a little later. It is important that you get what you want in that meeting. It is the same way on the field. Make

 

