# Section 217

---



Page 217

Our edge should be in tactics, in our belief, in our intensity, and in our mental acuity. It all has to be built in, once again in meetings and practice. You have to draw their attention. They must be able to maintain concentration and finish.

We believe in a starting rotation concept in our program. If you come out and practice hard and practice to the extent we expect of you, you should have a right to feel that you are going to be able to function in some capacity on our football team. You are going to be in the starting rotation. Now, we know the program indicates that 11 players will start. That is fine. But that is not the way it shakes out for us. We are a better football team if we play with 15 or 18, but not at the same time. The more people we can play on one side of the ball, the better we feel we can be. The more players you play, the more it will affect the stamina and the tempo of your team. It is also going to affect the mental health of your team. You may say that Mort can only go to his left. Well, put him in the game and let him go left, and then take him out. Put a guy that can go over, right, and left. Then put Mort back in at another time. Mort will feel good about himself, you will feel good about playing Mort, his folks will be happy, and all of his relatives will buy tickets. Now Mort will not go over and park his butt on the bench and detach from the game. He will not be able to afford to, because the next time it is 3rd and 1, his happy butt may be back out there going to the left again. It is important for the starting rotation concept to kick in for us.

If you invest, you play. That does not mean that you play all of the time. I did not say that. If you invest, you play. How much you play may be related to how outflanked you are. If you invest, you play, and we have a deal. There is nothing worse than the player who goes over on the sideline and tells others that he is not going to play. What does he do? They are looking up in the stands and waving at people. They are listening to the band and checking the hindquarters of the rally squad. They are not involved in the game at all. You tell them to get into the game, and they want to know where to line up. They are not ready to play. They are the first players to bitch about not playing after the game. Don't let them detach. I would rather have a lesser athlete in the game who is fresh than a premium athlete who is exhausted. We would rather play with 14 to 15 men.

If you play, you have accountability. We had a tough year last year. We were not a very good team. We had some great kids, and they played hard and worked hard. If they invested in practice, they got to play. They were always accountable. They did not complain about a lot of things. They knew that if we came up short in a game, the coaches were accountable, and so were they. It was an agonizing year. We were able to get through the year because they believed that they would get an opportunity to play and contribute. They knew by their involvement that they were going to be held accountable.

In talking about finish, think about this. No matter what you are doing in a practice session, you need to develop a finish. I learned this a long time ago, when I was at Virginia Tech. I was coaching the offensive line. We brought in a coach by the name of Phil Cutchins, who was the head coach at Oklahoma State, who got fired. It happens to us all sooner or later. Phil went into the banking business and was happy as hell. But our head coach brought Phil in to observe our practices because he knew football. He watched us practice as individuals and looked at our blocking schemes. The thing I got from one of those sessions with Phil was this: "Be careful what you say to your players." He said to talk to them about bouncing off the ground, not getting off the ground. Talk to players about exploding their eyes and hands. That has a more visual concept to it than just "Put your hands here." Get off the ground! Hurry up! Be quick, but don't hurry! There are a lot of word pictures that you can paint for your players that are important.

We apply this to the concept of finish. We try to finish every drill. We want them to get the idea that they do not gradually stop, they do not walk. The reason we came to this concept was this. If you go out and watch other teams practice, you will see a lot of players standing around doing nothing. Only a few players are being coached. The important thing about the time constraints is that we cannot afford to have anyone not being coached. If we have eight men in a line and

 

