# Section 7

---



3. Rockets in the Air: The AFL Takes Flight

“If you don’t like what’s being said, change the conversation.”

—Jon Hamm as Don Draper in 
Mad Men

There had been other Ameri
can Football Leagues attempting to compete with the National Football League before the iteration founded by Lamar Hunt in 1959, but the versions created in 1926, 1936, and 1940 fizzled out quickly. The All-America Football Conference lasted from 1946 through 1949 and sent three franchises to the NFL upon its dissolution. The World Football League lasted just two seasons from 1974 into 1975. The United States Football League lasted one season longer from 1983 through 1985, and the most those two leagues could do was to offer more money to NFL players and delay the status of NFL draft picks.

Only Hunt’s creation was able to take on the NFL at its own level, forcing a merger in 1966 after just seven seasons. Hunt and seven other businessmen formed the league at the end of the 1950s with franchises in Dallas, Denver, Los Angeles, New York, Houston, Buffalo, Boston, and Oakland. At first the AFL was stocked with NFL castoffs, though several of those players went on to legitimate Hall of Fame careers. Over time, the AFL gained an advantage over its more storied opponent by reaching into small black colleges to mine talent and doing away with the known quota rules NFL teams had adopted regarding the number of black players on any team and which positions they could play. The AFL would thus become a beacon of meritocracy—less because of an overriding civil rights mind-set and more due to simple necessity—and the speed with which the younger league was able to close the gap in quality of play forced the NFL to adjust its own racial thoughts. 

From the start the AFL went with more of a wide-open passing game; defenses and run games—dependent on the choreo­graphy of players who had worked together for years—didn’t generally exist at a premium level in the new league. In 1961 Houston Oilers receiver Charley Hennigan caught 82 passes for a ridiculous 1,746 yards, a mark that still ranks sixth all time in pro football history. Elroy “Crazy Legs” Hirsch had gained 1,495 receiving yards for the Los Angeles Rams’ wide-open offense in 1951, but no modern receiver would exceed Hennigan’s mark until 1995, when both Jerry Rice and Isaac Bruce did. 

As the league advanced, rushing attacks and defenses caught up. Multiplicity became the name of the game. While NFL coaches and play-designers were, for the most part, stuck in the ideology that you line up with a few plays and out-execute your opponent, the AFL was more diverse. Years before the 3-4 was a base defense in the NFL and hybrid fronts became the order of the day, multiple AFL coaches were running three-man fronts and moving their linebackers around in ways no NFL coach had thought to do. Putting men in motion, designing route combinations that could beat defenses all over the field, pinning receivers off at the beginning of their routes with aggressive man-on-man coverage—all of these concepts were advanced more in the 10 years of the AFL’s history than through the previous 40 years of NFL play.

Many coaches would ply their trade in the new league, but it was Sid Gillman and Hank Stram—the only two men who were head coaches of their teams through the league’s history—who personified the AFL’s progression from a gimmick-laden league with dubious fundamentals to a group of teams that would meet, and eventually exceed, the NFL’s standards. At the heart of it all were a series of schematic innovations, a primary reason the AFL’s decade is one of the most fascinating in pro football history. 

Sid Gillman: Father of the Modern Passing Game

It can be said of Sid Gillman that there was the passing game before him and the passing game after him. And the passing game after him is the modern one. When you see a running back flare out from the backfield to the slot, a tight end line up away from the formation, a slot receiver running a deep seam route, or a coach teaching his players using the three-digit system—and you see all of those things in the modern NFL—you are seeing Gillman’s innovations and perfections. When you see the West Coast Offense run like a precision ballet with the routes timed perfectly from quarterback to receiver, you are seeing the development of Gillman’s geometric concepts. “Much of what I did I got from Sid Gillman 20 years ago,” head coach Bill Walsh told 
Sports Illustrated
.

When a running back motions from the backfield to the slot or a receiver goes in pre-snap motion to help the quarterback discern what kind of defense he’s facing, these are ongoing iterations of ideas Gillman worked through before many of the current participants were alive.

When you see a spread offense use the entire field horizontally pre-snap, you are seeing the natural outgrowth of Gillman’s aggressive football philosophy developed during a time when the forward pass was still viewed with anything from trepidation to outright disgust in various quarters. “The field is 100 yards long and 53 yards wide,” Gillman said in 
The Games That Changed the Game
. “We’re going to use every damn inch of it and force the other guy to defend all of it.” 

Put simply, Gillman is the father of the modern passing game, and his relative anonymity outside of the circles of hardcore football geeks and coaches at every level is a shame. But those who know Gillman’s effect on the game—and in many cases on their own lives—will tell you what he really meant to the game and its strategic history. “Sid Gillman was the father of modern-day passing,” Oakland Raiders coach/owner Al Davis told 
The New York Times
. “It had been thought of as vertical, the length of the field. But Sid made it horizontal. Sid used the width of the field.” 

Cerebral quarterback Ron Jaworski had Gillman as his Philadelphia Eagles offensive coordinator during his Super Bowl season of 1980. “Nobody could make adjustments on the fly like Sid,” Jaworski wrote in 
The Games That Changed the Game
. “When the Eagles walked into the halftime locker room, Sid already had everything we needed on the chalkboard: fronts, coverages, hints, indicators. I believed in him so much that I just knew the changes we made during halftime were going to work. He was unmatched in his ability to figure out the opponent’s gameplan and recognize what a team was trying to do to us that day. The 1980 season was my finest in the NFL. I posted my best stats, was named Player of the Year, and got the Eagles to their first Super Bowl. None of this would have been possible without Sid Gillman. To this day I still hear his voice in my head when I think of the core principles of the passing game.”

From his time with the University of Miami (Ohio) to the University of Cincinnati; to the Los Angeles Rams of the NFL; to the Los Angeles and San Diego Chargers of the AFL; to the Houston Oilers of the AFC; to his time as a well-regarded assistant with the Dallas Cowboys, Chicago Bears, and Philadelphia Eagles, Gillman was always looking for a schematic advantage. More often than not, he found one, though the results were not always what he imagined. 

Gillman played for Ohio State head coach Sam Willaman in the 1930s, and it was Willaman’s multi-faceted offense that formed the basis of Gillman’s ideology. A fanatic for motion pictures, the young Gillman found a job as a movie theater usher and would cut the football highlights out of movie newsreels to take them home to study on his own projector. This began an obsession with game film and the study of opponent tendencies that followed him throughout his life. Long after he retired from coaching until his death in 2003, he watched game tape and took calls from all kinds of coaches
—
at all levels of the game
—
who asked the offensive genius for pearls of wisdom.

Gillman had a 20-year stint as a college coach, culminating in his time as the head coach at Miami of Ohio from 1944 through 1947 and at Cincinnati from 1949 through 1954. In 1955 he was hired to replace Hampton Pool as the head coach of the Rams at the tail end of the team’s point-a-minute legacy. Gillman brought in his own philosophies and led the Rams to the NFL title game in his first season but struggled over the next four seasons as the Rams’ talent pool dissipated. Even in 1959 when the Rams finished with a 2–10 record, Gillman’s offense still ranked second in the league in points. 

Fired after the 1959 season, Gillman was available to take an offer from Los Angeles Chargers owner Barron Hilton in time for the AFL’s inaugural season. Gillman accepted the offer, took over as general manager as well, and set about revolutionizing the professional passing game in the new league.

The AFL needed a schematic template for its passing game, and as time went on, it became clear that Gillman’s concepts ruled the roost. Acolytes like Davis and Walsh took Gillman’s ideas and made them their own—Davis did so more with the deep passing game, and Walsh did so with the geometric, horizontal aspects of the playbook—but it was Gillman who combined theory and philosophy into an entirely new package. Together, Gillman and the AFL reached unexpected heights. 

There were route concepts and combinations before Gillman, of course, but even the most elevated passing games before Gillman joined the Chargers consisted primarily of isolation routes in which the receiver was tasked to get open using his physical abilities—speed, strength, and elusiveness—against mostly man-on-man coverage. Gillman’s concepts were far more advanced and predated the proliferation of zone and hybrid defenses, and when those more complicated defenses came along, Gillman’s insistence that receivers should work together to overwhelm defenses before and after the snap set the tone.

Moreover, Gillman’s passing game set up his run game and vice versa. With his early Chargers teams, he had Keith Lincoln and Paul Lowe in his backfield, and when defenses arrayed themselves against the Chargers’ receivers, Lincoln and Lowe presented the impossible problem uncommon in professional football at that time: who do you cover and who do you tackle? “The theory was to pass, screen, draw, and trap,” Gillman told 
The NFL Today
. “We felt that if we could pass successfully, we could run the draw play, which you see so often. Then, we could force a heavy rush and then we could have the trap play, where you let [a defender] come in and you hit him with the cross-block. There’s 50 different kinds of screens—the late screen, the slip screen, the speed screen—and we had all of those and we could score.” 

Gillman’s 1981 Eagles playbook showed an impressive complexity of routes for every potential receiver—a level of complexity that would be impressive in today’s game. Gillman had installed most of that into the Chargers’ playbooks in the 1960s, and no defense was quite ready for it all—especially early AFL defenses that were often low on combined talent. “I always felt before Paul Brown,” Gillman told the 
Chicago Tribune
, “coaches just rolled the ball out onto the field.”

Whether that was true or not, Gillman’s approach represented a series of masterful steps forward. As much of a stickler as he was for the precision of a route, Gillman sometimes referred to routes as “feelings” and he wanted his receivers to react within structure to what a defender did. Defined and designed openings were Gillman’s purpose, but the best of his receivers were allowed to freelance to a degree as long as it worked. This was a prelude to the option routes of the Run-and-Shoot era that you see in every modern passing offense, but it was as if it came from outer space back then.

Because the AFL is categorized primarily as a let-it-rip league with the deep pass as the main attraction, some have typecast Gillman too narrowly as a go-route and post-route play designer. He was that to be sure, but through his time in the AFL, Gillman expanded his passing game horizontally as much as he did vertically. More specifically, he did so geometrically.

The Field Balance Theory

In 1964 Sid Gillman sent assistant coach Tom Bass to a coffee shop to meet with a San Diego State math professor to discuss geometry in general—specifically, potential geometry of routes. Gillman had the notion that every route could be perfectly explained and executed with a pre-planned set of angles: the angle of the route to its breaking point when the receiver cuts, the angle of the route after the cut, and the angle from the quarterback’s release point to the point of the catch. “We thought about it, and if you look at [passing] patterns, they are all geometrically designed,” Bass told 
The (South Carolina) Post and Courier. 
“Basically, the only objective we had was to try to make sure when we ran the pass routes that the ball was in the air the same amount of time so that we could time out our passing game.” 

Well, that wasn’t the 
only
 objective. Timing was one part of it, but rhythm was an equal and crucial component. If the quarterback and his receivers understood the exact depth and length of routes, and the quarterback had all those different depths in his head, he could rely on the gameplan and trust his timing. The quarterback could throw with more anticipation, passing the ball to a spot where the receiver hadn’t yet travelled, and that level of trust would set up a rhythm of completions in the quarterback’s head. “We really wanted to make the quarterback throws all the same,” Bass said. “If you are at the left hash mark, and the throw is to the right sideline, that is the toughest throw. The ball is in the air quite a while. But if you bring the right-side receiver in four yards closer to the center of the field, the flight time of the ball is almost exactly the same [as a throw to the receiver on the left side].”

Gillman and Bass put the angles together and made their players understand the concept, and Gillman took things a step further by assigning different names to different areas of the field. 

So when Gillman talked about filling the space of the field with as many targets as possible, he wasn’t referring to some kind of random, happenstance collection of receivers. He was literally creating a new dimension in football, in which route concepts were designed and complementary at an entirely new level.

With the timing and geometry set, Gillman’s quarterbacks would also throw to their running backs, who would frequently motion to the slot from the backfield pre-snap. Defenses had to face as many as five receivers, and in the days of the two-back, two-receiver, one-tight end formation, that was fairly revolutionary. If this sounds a lot like the West Coast Offense Bill Walsh developed as Paul Brown’s offensive assistant with the Cincinnati Bengals from 1968 through 1975 and perfected as head coach of the San Francisco 49ers from 1979 through 1988, that’s no accident. Walsh was Al Davis’ running backs coach in 1966 and he later called his AFL tenure the foundation of his offensive philosophy. He was exposed to Gillman’s passing concepts, which Davis adopted unapologetically when he left Gillman’s employ as his receivers coach from 1960 through 1962 and took over the Oakland Raiders in 1963. “It was a fully dimensional approach,” Walsh said in 
The Genius
, “utilizing the backs and tight ends much more extensively than other offenses. A typical NFL team might have three or four patterns for the halfback, but the Raiders’ system had as many as 20, and even they didn’t use anything close to Gillman’s whole playbook. To develop an understanding of it took time, but once learned, it was invaluable.”

Although the passing concepts of the NFL in the 1960s did include single and dual crossing routes and some basic option route concepts, Gillman’s theories regarding route concepts were more complex. His acolytes include many of the most talented play designers and theorists in NFL history. “All our terminology—and the terminology Bill Walsh took with him when he left here—came from Sid, plus a lot of the coaching points and much of the offense,” Davis told 
Sports Illustrated
’s Paul Zimmerman. “Sid’s idea was to spread the field and get everyone into the pattern. He liked the quick strike, the relentless attack down the field, same as Bill Walsh. The quick strike to Lance Alworth, where he breaks a short pass for 60 yards, the quick strike to Jerry Rice, same thing. But then we got away from that and started holding the ball longer, looking for the big one.”
 

Gillman had a clear numeric system for the routes assigned to his receivers, tight ends, and running backs, and that was important because he was using the backs and tight ends as much or more as any other coach and definitely in different ways. A defense facing a Sid Gillman offense might see a two-back set and a tight end aligned to the formation—only to have one or both backs motion into the slot or out wide, and the tight end peeling away to the slot. 

Against the elementary 4-3 defenses of the day and even against the AFL’s occasional 3-4 and nickel hybrid formations, it was a lot to deal with. And as was later the case with Don Coryell’s systems with the St. Louis Cardinals and San Diego Chargers and Mike Martz’s system with the “Greatest Show on Turf” St. Louis Rams, the play calls were comprised of the single-digit route numbers combined—from left to right, first the outside receivers and then the inside receiver. All of those systems were close imitations of what Gillman invented decades ago. 

In Gillman’s system an 
866
 call, for example, would have the left outside receiver (or X receiver) run an 8 route (a deep post), while the outside right Z receiver would run his version of the 6 route (a deep, breaking in-route), and the inside Y receiver would run a 6 route, also a deep, breaking in-route. The route calls to the strong side were always orchestrated together. If the middle number was 0 or the middle number wasn’t called, that told the inside receiver (the Y receiver) to block. If the Y receiver’s rusher didn’t rush on an even-numbered route, he was to run a delayed straight route. If the rusher didn’t rush on an odd-numbered route, the Y receiver was to run a delayed short check-down route to provide another easy read for the quarterback.

Gillman’s routes were highly complex for any era, and the responsibilities extended to every position. There were 24 different routes for halfbacks and fullbacks and a series of mirrored flares, in which the two backs run routes in tandem. The depth and speed of the route was dependent on the protection. Combination routes with protection adjustments for running backs don’t always happen in today’s NFL—never mind the AFL of the 1960s.

His crossing routes were incredibly diverse and effective. In the flare series, a running back would run a flare pattern outside the backfield, while there was at least one crossing route and slant or post combination. The dual series had two wide receivers running the same route from either side. If he had two receivers breaking from the double or dual series concept based on an audible, the quarterback would simply call the weakside route in the combination first and so on. Gillman would rely on his quarterbacks to be smart enough to audible based on the defense and he would rely on his receivers to make quick decisions to alter their routes while running them based on coverage. Two decades before the Run-and-Shoot brought multiple option routes to the NFL, Gillman was already setting the pace. 

Gillman’s route release concepts had their roots in his and Bass’ geometric studies. “A release is a movement made by a WR while running the stem of a route on the way to the BREAKING POINT,” he wrote in his 1981 Eagles playbook. Gillman defined the breaking point as a designated spot downfield in line with the receiver’s basic alignment position. The breaking point was the spot where the quarterback knew his receiver was going to be. The receiver could vary his line to the point or work a double move in, but it was of paramount importance that the receiver got to that point so that the quarterback knew just where he would be. This allowed the quarterback to throw with confidence and anticipation.

Now, multiply that single route concept by as many as five potential receivers trained to ply their routes and breaking points in specific horizontal areas of the field and you start to understand how difficult these passing concepts were to defend. “His passing system was a lot different from ours,” former Chiefs tight end Fred Arbanas, who was coached by Gillman in AFL All-Star games, said in the book, 
Uncrowned Champs
. “He spent a lot more time on it, with different routes, alternate routes, and ways of screening off linebackers and safeties to break the other guys free on patterns. He wouldn’t just show us stuff on the blackboard, though. He would tell us all the reasons why they would work at different times in the game and when to work the screening plays. In those days the defensive backs could knock you around all over the place until the ball was in the air. Sid’s screen patterns for his receivers helped break those guys away from you, especially for me because the middle backer would drop off and give you a shot to knock you off a pattern, but the way he set up those screens broke us free.”

John Hadl, Gillman’s quarterback in San Diego from 1962 through 1971 who led the NFL in passing yards three times during that era, said that an education in the passing game under Gillman was like nothing he could have imagined. “I played for the Rams, Packers, and Oilers after the Chargers and can’t remember any of their plays,” 
Hadl said
, according to 
Uncrowned Champs
. “But the ones we ran in Sid’s scheme were so drilled-in through repetition that I can still call them in my sleep. He really taught me how to study and develop a gameplan. The way he was, always so precise in his passing game, was so far ahead of his time. He kept notebooks of pass route descriptions, drawings of each pattern and what everyone else was doing. He was really a master at understanding the game and he wanted his quarterbacks to know it all. He had our receivers screening, like setting picks in basketball, for each other to get space between the defender and our primary receiver or throw flares to spots they vacated when they followed another guy over the middle. We’d send two backs out in a five-man route with each going in different directions. He even had [Keith] Lincoln and [Paul] Lowe run flares in different directions to get isolated on a linebacker they could outrun. We practiced so much repetition and watched so much film that I can still remember the plays we called.” 

Hadl threw the ball just 204 times in three seasons at Kansas as a running back and quarterback, so it was a bit like going straight from high school to a post-graduate education. Gillman taught Hadl that if a defender was looking at the running back, it was man-to-man coverage. And if the defender was looking at the quarterback, it was zone coverage. What Hadl called “adjustment routes” based on coverage were embryonic option routes—years ahead of their time. “If [Lance] Alworth went to the line and saw a certain formation or a player in a certain spot, we’d look at each other and knew we both saw the same thing and make an adjustment to the play at the line,” Hadl said. “Gillman also taught us to design our play calls on particular downs and their distance tendencies that Sid would prepare for from all the film he studied. He had a high percentage of correctness, too.”

Billy Joe, who played running back for the Denver Broncos, Buffalo Bills, Miami Dolphins, and New York Jets from 1963 through 1969 and thus saw Gillman’s offenses through multiple lenses, later coached at Cheyney State College in Pennsylvania and worked his way up the ladder to a position with the Eagles at the same time Gillman was there. “Sid was the passing consultant for [Eagles head coach] Dick Vermeil and he’d come and talk to us about his theories of the passing game,” Joe said. “He was still selling the same passing principles in the late ’70s and early ’80s that he’d developed in the early ’60s with the Chargers, and they still proved to be the best and most sound ideas about how to throw the football. It just shows his genius in the passing game and how far ahead of the pack he was back in the early ’60s.”

That said, the most important game of Gillman’s life was the one in which he completely reversed course and presented his opponent with a set of schemes they couldn’t stop: the 1963 AFL championship. 

1963 AFL Championship: San Diego Chargers 51, Boston Patriots 10

Considering how aggressive Sid Gillman professed his offenses to be, the 1963 AFL Championship win was a master’s class in how to react to a defense’s tendencies. Gillman knew full well that the Boston Patriots were going to blitz like crazy. It was a major construct of their defense under head coach Mike Holovak, and in two regular season games against the San Diego Chargers, Boston had limited Gillman’s offense to a total of 511 yards and gone after John Hadl and fellow quarterback Tobin Rote mercilessly. Keith Lincoln’s 71-yard halfback pass in the game at San Diego was the biggest play in either game. Lance Alworth caught 13 passes for 210 yards and a touchdown in the game at Boston, but Gillman’s Chargers were no sure thing against Holovak’s Patriots and their aggressive defense. San Diego won both regular-season games but scored a total of 24 points.

Counter to the common canard that defense wasn’t an AFL priority, Boston allowed 79 rushing yards per game and 265 yards of total offense per contest. Paul Lowe had run for 1,010 yards and a 5.7 yards-per-carry average in 1963, but in two regular-season games against Boston, he gained a grand total of six yards on 12 carries. By some accounts the Patriots blitzed on up to 70 percent of their defensive downs, an astonishing number for the time. “I don’t think that I ever saw a team that could blitz as much as they did and get away with it,” Gillman said in 
The
 
American Football League: A Year-by-Year History, 1960–1969
. “They used a combination of different linebackers and were one of the first teams to use safety blitzes effectively.”

With that in mind, Gillman turned to a different plan—the “feast or famine” strategy, in which the Chargers would use Boston’s blitzes against them. Now instead of running his receivers ragged and relying on the occasional option pass, Gillman devised a new set of schemes based on a number of concepts: pre-snap motion, play-action as a deceptive practice, the inside trap, and the outside toss. Gillman sent Lincoln and Lowe in motion quite often to force Boston’s linebackers to cover; this forced the Patriots to choose between pressure and coverage. He put Alworth and split end Don Norton on the same side of the field and splayed tight end Dave Kocourek to the other side, creating disadvantageous matchups for Boston’s safeties. 

The Patriots still blitzed, but the results were often disastrous. Gillman seemed to know when and from where the pressure was coming. He would call tosses to the outside against inside blitzes and flush multi-gap pressures with trap plays in which the Patriots’ aggressiveness was used against them. According to Greg Cosell’s game charting in 
The Games That Changed the Game, 
the Patriots blitzed on
 
28 of San Diego’s 60 offensive plays, and the Chargers gained 352 yards and scored four touchdowns on those blitzes.
 
“We studied their game films. We knew when we could go out into patterns and when we had to block,” Lowe said. “We knew what they were going to do. They were a blitzing team, and we decided to trap them. It was a super gameplan.”

Rote and Hadl combined for 17-of-26 passes for 305 yards and three touchdowns, but it was the rushing totals that were extraordinary. The Chargers ran the ball 32 times for 318 yards and four touchdowns in the 51–10 win, and the further behind the Patriots got, the more they dug their own hole by sticking to the blitz—even as it was apparent that Gillman had figured that out.

Marion Campbell, Boston’s defensive line coach in 1962 and 1963, would go on to coach with four NFL teams, finishing his coaching career with the Georgia Bulldogs in 1994. The 1963 AFL Championship forever changed his views on how to array his defenders to create pressure. “It’s easy to let ’er rip with the blitz, but we got hurt badly with that.” Campbell said in 
The Games That Changed the Game
. “If it fails, like it did against the Chargers, you’ve got nothing to fall back on. From then on I only coached a controlled system where the other team was going to have to earn every score on its own.”

Fate—and Gillman’s own shortcomings—kept him to that one AFL title despite his clear innovative brilliance. The Buffalo Bills beat his Chargers in the 1964 and 1965 AFL Championships with a defense that presented multiple fronts and a discipline that had San Diego’s best players stopped short again and again—not to mention with Jack Kemp, the quarterback Gillman thought he could hide through the league’s waiver system and subsequently lost for $100. Gillman’s refusal to pay his players what other teams would resulted in the loss of defensive talent; a defensive line that Kansas City Chiefs quarterback Len Dawson called the AFL’s best in 1963 started to hemorrhage talent, including players like Earl Faison and Ernie Ladd in the mid-1960s. Transfer of team ownership from Barron Hilton to Gene Klein magnified a lack of understanding of the concept of player worth. This led to a series of four straight third-place finishes in the AFL’s Western Division to finish off Gillman’s time with the team.

Gillman’s time with the Houston Oilers in 1973 and 1974 was marked by a remarkable turnaround from 1–8 in his first season to 7–7 in his second. He then lost a power struggle to Bum Phillips, who had been Gillman’s defensive coordinator in San Diego from 1967 through 1970 and had tried to implement the 3-4 as a base defense during that time, a move that would have predated the eventual installation of the 3-4 by a number of years. But Gillman insisted that Phillips revert back to the 4-3 after a couple of nerve-racking showings.

After leaving Houston in 1974, Gillman spent the rest of his professional life as an offensive consultant for everyone from the Philadelphia Eagles to the United States International University. Until the end of his life, he watched tape from his extensive library and looked for ways to destroy defenses.
 
“The real treasure I got from Sid was learning how to be a winner, what it took: commitment, love of football, excellence, work ethic,” Al Davis told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1991. “No one could ever outwork Sid. He taught me how an organization should be run. There are just so many intangibles that came from Sid, the foundation of how we practice, for instance. See it, write it, learn it, do it.”

His lone championship neither diminishes Gillman’s radical genius nor the debt every modern NFL team owes to it. As much as any coach in the history of professional football, Gillman created a new structure in which teams could win—through all generations. After Gillman’s Chargers won the 1963 AFL title, he reached out to NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle, asking for a matchup between the champions of the two leagues. No NFL team had played an AFL team before. But given San Diego’s balance on offense and defense, it was thought by many that if the Chargers couldn’t beat the NFL champion Chicago Bears, they could have at least given Chicago a more competitive game than the Kansas City Chiefs and Oakland Raiders offered a few years later against the Green Bay Packers in the first two Super Bowls. 

Apparently, the specter of a possible AFL upset wasn’t appealing to Rozelle. Gillman sent a letter to the NFL commissioner, who had worked with him in the Rams’ front office, using the recent Second Ecumenical Council. Pope John Paul XXIII hoped to eliminate longstanding bitterness between Catholicism and Judaism. The Pope had stated: “The Jews should not be presented as rejected or accursed by God.” 

“Pope John was a great man because he recognized ‘the other league,’” Gillman wrote.

“Yes, but it took a thousand years,” Rozelle responded.

The frustration wasn’t just that the NFL would not entertain Gillman’s request for an interleague championship; it was also that the NFL kept taking shots at the AFL’s methodology. “I don’t think too much of the AFL yet,” Johnny Unitas told writer Ed Fitzgerald in 1964. “It seems to me they play strictly offensive football and almost all passing. They have no defense at all. I know it has been said that some of their clubs could beat some of our clubs. But I can’t see it. I don’t think they would stand a chance principally because they don’t have any defense. They aren’t really complete football teams yet.” 

That was the perception of the AFL in the first half of the decade, and in some AFL cities, it was true. But in Buffalo Lou Saban and Joe Collier had created a team that would buck those trends with a decidedly old-school approach and a defense that was among the most innovative and effective of its era. 

War Memorial: The Bills Bring the NFL to the AFL

The Buffalo Bills of the mid-1960s had an NFL mentality. While the rest of the AFL seemed to be throwing the ball in higher-rent stadiums in line with the new TV contract, Buffalo played in old War Memorial Stadium and had two equal power factors: the running of Cookie Gilchrist and a defense that may have been the best the AFL ever saw.

Gilchrist was the man who kept the power running going, gaining 3,056 yards and scoring 31 rushing touchdowns on 676 carries from 1962 through 1964 before he was traded to the Denver Broncos in February of 1965 after wearing out his welcome with management. But the real heart of the team that won the AFL title in 1964 and 1965 wasn’t the run game or even quarterback Jack Kemp. It was a defense that employed advanced principles that would take most of the rest of pro football a decade to employ and implement. The brains behind that outfit was defensive coordinator Joe Collier, who was hired as the team’s linebackers and defensive backs coach by head coach Lou Saban in 1962. 

Collier, who came from Western Illinois and the Boston Patriots, was much more than that. Given the freedom to merge his schematic concepts with his personnel, Collier started running three-man fronts long before Bum Phillips and Chuck Fairbanks were doing that in the 1970s. Instead of the traditional four-man front with the occasional linebacker blitz, Collier saw the landscape of his defensive front as a more complicated architecture, in which players had varied assignments based on the situation. “We had a fine group of people and we played together,” linebacker Mike Stratton said in 
Going Long
. “We had it all—good defensive backs, linebackers, and a line strong enough to put the rush on and agile enough to play the run. By playing defense like we did, we put a lot of pressure on the quarterback. That was the key. If we had pressure, we could play game with blitzers and change coverage responsibilities.”

Stratton was one of those fine players; he was named to six straight AFL Pro Bowls from 1963 through 1968 and was a first-team All-Pro every year from 1964 through 1966. Defensive tackle Tom Sestak joined the Bills as a 245-pound linebacker/tight end prospect but bulked up to 270 pounds and became one of the strongest interior defenders in professional football. 

The 1964 Bills defense led the league with 50 sacks, a team record that wouldn’t be broken until 2013. Through the 1964 and 1965 seasons, they put together a 17-game streak, in which they didn’t allow a single rushing touchdown. They had 28 interceptions for 470 return yards and two touchdowns in 1964 and 32 interceptions for 393 return yards and a touchdown in 1965. Safety George Saimes was a bibliophile and was nicknamed “Camus in Shoulder Pads” and “the Existentialist Pass Defender.” He was a smaller, quicker range safety who read offenses well and could surprise with the blitz. Cornerbacks Butch Byrd and Booker Edgerson limited receiver releases at the line of scrimmage with the trademark AFL bump-and-run style and they were athletic and agile enough to cover any receiver downfield through any route. 

The team Saban and Collier put together for the 1964 season finished their regular season with a league-best 12–2 record. Their two losses were by a total of 11 points. They led the AFL in both points scored (400) and points allowed (242). The only thing that stood between the Bills and the franchise’s first championship was the San Diego Chargers team that had so confused the Patriots in the 1963 Championship Game.

The 1964 AFL Championship: Buffalo Bills 20, San Diego Chargers 7

The 1964 Chargers couldn’t quite match the 1963 Chargers. The ’64 team went 8–5–1 and ranked fourth in the AFL in points scored as opposed to first the year before. Quarterback Tobin Rote started the season, but John Hadl took over after the team went 1–2–1 in Rote’s early games. San Diego rattled off a five-game winning streak with the smart, mobile Hadl under center. However, they lost both of their regular-season contests against the Buffalo Bills, so the potential result of the championship game against the Bills on December 26 should have been on Sid Gillman’s radar. 

The plan Joe Collier put together, though, was the real story of this game. To checkmate Gillman’s varied and multiple formations, he set his defenders up in equally diverse ways and completely confused the smartest coach in football. The Chargers started off hot, though. The first drive started with a draw handoff from Rote to Keith Lincoln, in which Lincoln rumbled upfield for 38 yards. Three plays later Rote hit tight end Dave Kocourek for a 26-yard touchdown pass off play-action, in which Rote did a fine job of moving backward out of the pocket and hitting Kocourek over the middle. 

On San Diego’s next drive, everything changed when Bills linebacker Mike Stratton absolutely poleaxed Lincoln on a halfback flare pass, causing Lincoln to suffer broken ribs. 

It was later called “the Hit Heard ’Round the World,” and hyperbole aside, it completely changed the complexion of the game and established the Bills as the bullies on the block. The play itself was based on defensive intelligence, though: Stratton adjusted to a halfback pattern he’d seen the Chargers run before. Stratton had noticed that on one particular curl/flat pattern if the linebacker to the quarterback’s front side was playing off, the halfback would be the quarterback’s primary read. Stratton baited Rote into throwing the ball to Lincoln by playing off and then drove toward Lincoln after he caught the ball. “I started back to Lincoln and I saw that they were throwing to him,” Stratton said in 
Going Long
. “It was just: put your head down and try to dig the dirt because, golly, if Lincoln caught the ball in time to give me a juke, hell, he could have been gone. I was trying to get there just as he caught it or after he caught it, where I could get a hand on him. But it worked out a little differently.” 

According to Lincoln, the play happened that way in part because of Rote’s late read. Paul Lowe ran a deep wheel pattern up the left seam from a split-back set, while Lincoln faked a block and wound up in the left flat area, waiting for the ball. “The first time [Rote] looked at me, Stratton was about 20 yards downfield,” Lincoln said. “He saw me out there, knew I was his man. So, he started coming. In the meantime Rote decided he was coming to me. The rush was in on him; he threw the goddamned ball to me like you’d throw a snowball down the chimney. And just as the ball got to me, Stratton hit me. He separated my sternum, rib cage. It was a good hit, a clean hit.” 

Taking Lincoln out of the game hurt the Chargers, and the Bills had more coming for Gillman. They alternated between heavy over fronts, in which the line was slanted to the strong side with three-man fronts, and the linebackers dropped into coverage. This negated Gillman’s Field Balance Theory because Collier placed his defenders in every area just as Gillman intended to do with his offensive players. 

The Bills came out of the game with three interceptions
—
two from Rote and one from Hadl
—
and at least two more from Rote that could have been intercepted if they weren’t dropped. Buffalo did a fantastic job of limiting San Diego’s sideline passes, created pressure without blitzing, and when the Bills did blitz, they showed some different looks such as having an inside linebacker cheat up over the center at a 45-degree angle, predating Joe Greene’s stunt 4-3 angle rush by a decade. 

San Diego got a bit of traction in the run game by attacking three-man fronts with draws and delays, but its defense couldn’t match the power of Cookie Gilchrist, who gained 122 yards on 16 carries. Add in the 70 yards on 18 carries from Wray Carlton and the 16 yards and one touchdown on five carries from Jack Kemp, and Buffalo’s two-sided strategy paid the ultimate dividend—the team’s first championship. 

The Bills won the rematch in the 1965 AFL title game in a 23–0 blowout, but Lou Saban left Buffalo after the 1965 season and was replaced by Collier. As often happens, Collier, who went on to design the “Orange Crush” defenses of the 1970s for the Denver Broncos and brought hybrid concepts and three-man base fronts to the NFL at a time when Bum Phillips and Chuck Fairbanks were also doing so, proved to be a better defensive coordinator than he was a head coach.

Collier should ultimately be remembered as one of the NFL’s greatest defensive minds. His key to the kingdom is that he was able to outsmart Gillman more than once. Collier wasn’t the only AFL coach coming forward with defensive innovations. In Kansas City Hank Stram rewrote his playbook in multiple ways, and this would lead to the most wins of any coach in the league’s history, as well as the league’s most dominant victory over the NFL. Before that could happen, though, he would have to go through a blowtorch of perfect execution that had already confounded every NFL team more than once.

Matriculation: Hank Stram’s Constant Innovation

Hank Stram was one of the more unconventional coaches in professional football history and certainly one of the most innovative. A cocky rooster with mile-a-minute sarcasm and a penchant for tailored suits, Stram was so obsessed with football formations that restaurateurs in the Kansas City area would rush to his table when he was seated to give him paper napkins so he wouldn’t draw X’s and O’s on the cloth ones. “He was a piece of work,” Kansas City Chiefs defensive tackle Ed Lothamer said in 
When It Was Just a Game
. Stram spent time as an assistant coach in college from 1948 through 1959 at Purdue, SMU, Notre Dame, and Miami, and the first head coaching job he had in football was with the Dallas Texans of the AFL, starting in 1960. He was hired by Texans owner/AFL founder Lamar Hunt, who had played for Stram at SMU, after Bud Wilkinson and Tom Landry turned the job down.

The Texans became the Kansas City Chiefs in 1963, and by then Stram had taken his team to an AFL title in 1962. Two more AFL titles followed in 1966 and 1969, and so did two Super Bowls—a crushing 35–10 loss to the Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl I and an equally convincing 23–7 victory against the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl IV—the last game in AFL history.

Stram was one of the few people involved in the AFL throughout its history and he’s the winningest coach in the league’s annals with a regular-season record of 87–48–5 and a postseason mark of 4–2 from 1960 through 1969. From the start he proved to be an outstanding talent scout, helping to bring aboard multiple Hall of Fame and working with scout Lloyd C.A. Wells to find players at smaller African American schools in the south. 

Stram spent the first few seasons in Kansas City building that team around a young base of talent, leading to an 11–2–1 record in 1966. After thrashing the two-time defending league champion Buffalo Bills 31–7 in the 1966 AFL title game, Stram thought he and his team were ready for the ultimate challenge—taking on Vince Lombardi and the Packers in the first Super Bowl on January 15, 1967. Stram was right—for about one half of football.

Super Bowl I

The common narrative of the first four Super Bowls is of an NFL that had already established its supremacy and an AFL that caught up quickly. The Green Bay Packers’ decisive wins against Hank Stram’s Kansas City Chiefs and Al Davis’ Oakland Raiders in Super Bowls I and II suggest the Packers were simply an unbeatable force in championship situations, winning the final three NFL titles under Vince Lombardi’s watch. The AFL was the more schematically diverse league, but neither the Chiefs nor the Raiders could match Green Bay’s experience and discipline. 

The 1966 Chiefs had an average age of 26.4 per player; the 1966 Packers averaged 27.6 years of age. But the Packers had 12 starters over the age of 30, while the Chiefs had just two. Stram’s inventions would eventually overcome the NFL’s stodgier and less flexible teams. The Packers were a different brand of beast when they had to be, though their philosophy stemmed far more from ensuring that every player did his job perfectly. Stram believed in execution, but he also believed that the errors of youth could be masked to a degree by sleight of hand when necessary. 

Len Dawson was Stram’s quarterback from 1962 through 1974, and his story is perhaps the most prominent example of an NFL misfit finding historic success in the new league. Dawson was selected fifth overall in the 1957 draft by the Pittsburgh Steelers, but he sat on the bench behind Bobby Layne for three seasons and then two more behind Milt Plum with the Cleveland Browns after the Steelers traded him on December 31, 1959. Dawson completed 21-of-45 passes for 204 yards, two touchdowns, and five interceptions in his first five seasons. When the Browns released him, that put him in the sights of Stram, Dawson’s coach at Purdue. The Chiefs signed Dawson on June 30, 1962, and the rest was history.

Well, almost history. In Dawson’s first three passing attempts for the Chiefs, he threw an interception, fumbled the ball, and missed an open receiver. Still, Stram was patient. “I was shocked at how bad he was at first,” Stram said. “But I couldn’t help but realize that five years of sitting on the bench or manning telephones didn’t make a man sharp. I stuck with him, and he quickly smoothed out the rough spots.” 

By 1966 Dawson was running one of the most dynamic and diverse offenses in the game, regardless of the league. The Chiefs that season went 11–2–1, the best record in franchise history to that point, and beat the two-time AFL champion Buffalo Bills in the league title game. They were as ready as they could be for any opponent in the first Super Bowl, but these were the Lombardi Packers, winners of five NFL titles in the decade. That they were not as schematically diverse as the Chiefs did not matter.
 
“Green Bay was power and execution,” Michael MacCambridge wrote in 
America’s Game
. “The Packers playbook was not a thick one. It was not as if the Packers were tricking anybody. Bart Starr could have called the plays at the line of scrimmage. From the Packers’ mind-set, shifting, men in motion, the moving pocket, the Tight I formation, some of those things were looked at by the NFL as smoke and mirrors. Gimmickry. And to a certain NFL mind-set, it was dishonest. It was a refutation of what pro football was all about.” 

When, in fact, if you take a longer view, it was part of the game and always had been. And some of the elements of what the Chiefs employed went back into parts of the package of football in the ’30s and ’40s. The old Lombardi playbook worked when Lombardi was running it, but history would quickly pass it by. Lombardi’s view of the football world in 1967 was the NFL’s conventional wisdom—out-execute your opponent, and things will go well. But if you look at both styles of play and their playbooks, there is a lot more in pro football today that is similar to what the Chiefs did in Super Bowl I than what the Packers did. The success of Lombardi’s simplicity was based entirely on belief and execution. Stram and many of his AFL cohorts had a different view—that the multiplicity of a playbook was its own inherent advantage. 

This played out pretty well for the Chiefs in the first half of Super Bowl I. They went into halftime with just a 14–10 deficit and had to feel that they had at least half a chance of pulling off a major upset. Running back Curtis McClinton’s first-half touchdown—the only touchdown the Chiefs scored on the day—had elements of the modern principle of bringing multiple play options from a single look. The touchdown came from a play called 
54 Mike Backs O
. “I felt like a champion to be crowned,” McClinton said. “It was a matter of straightening up the tie and straightening the hat. The first part of that comes from the 54,
 
which is a mountain because that’s where we made most of our rushing touchdowns. We’d kick out the ends, bring down the tackle, and run through the hole, making the linebacker come up. And if they came up, we would fake that we were running and send the back out into the backfield and the end down the field. It was a very tough play for linebackers, middle linebackers, and cornerbacks because we would run that play successfully as a run, successfully as a pass in the flat, and successfully as a pass to the other side. It was the meat and butter of our game because [any] one of those plays could hurt you. And we had the personnel to do it.”

The Packers didn’t argue that point.
 
“The Chiefs were more talented than any other team we on the Packers had ever faced,” defensive end Willie Davis said in 
The Ultimate Super Bowl Book
. “Bigger, stronger, faster. We knew the game could have gone the other way. But they were not experienced.”

On defense, the Chiefs came out with their Triple Stack front with the linebackers directly behind the ends and other varied fronts, which caused further confusion for the Packers, the experienced champions who thought they’d seen everything. “You didn’t really know what you were going up against,” Packers offensive lineman Forrest Gregg said. “We were used to going up against a basic four-man line. We went to the line of scrimmage, and Kansas City showed a defensive front we had not seen before. It was puzzling, out of our realm of experience on a football field. Jerry Kramer was playing right guard. I looked over at Jerry. He looked over at me and threw his hands up and shrugged his shoulders like, ‘I don’t know.’”

The Chiefs also ran a lot of five-man receiving formations early in the game, thinking they could get away with that because the Packers blitzed so infrequently. This left Dawson relatively unprotected as the backs flared out of the backfield, but that’s where the moving pocket came in—Dawson could read the pressure, move away from it, and make the throw against base defenses. That’s common in today’s NFL, of course, but back then it presented a problem. Green Bay linebacker Dave Robinson said that Dawson told him later that he and Stram had analyzed the Packers’ 1966 defense, discovering that they blitzed the opposing quarterback about three times per game. “Lenny told me that if that happened to them, they would either throw the ball away or take a sack for those three downs and really tax our defense as far as coverage was concerned,” Robinson said.

The Green Bay Packers’ 
Blitz-3
 during Super Bowl I

Lombardi’s adjustment to a more aggressive defensive approach in the second half paid obvious dividends. Davis later said that the Packers played conservatively in the first half because Lombardi was worried about the Chiefs getting a few big plays off, and as Davis put it, “then, we’d have a tiger by the tail.” 

That changed early in the second half, when the Packers called 
Blitz-3
, which sent Robinson and linebacker Lee Roy Caffey with tackle Henry Jordan leading the way. Robinson held up tight end Fred Arbanas and then blew through to the backfield. Jordan arrived as Caffey did, and Dawson, who wasn’t expecting the blitz, threw the ball up to get rid of it. The ball landed easily in the hands of Packers cornerback Willie Wood, who returned the interception to the Kansas City 5-yard line. Running back Elijah Pitts ran the ball in for Green Bay’s third touchdown on the next play, and the game was effectively over. The Chiefs were a great young team, but the Packers had been in championship situations at a different level. 

Now, the Chiefs couldn’t run their five-man patterns because they needed to keep backs and tight ends in to block against the blitz. And the Packers were able to play ball control, forcing even more of a sense of desperation from Stram’s team. “The key to winning that game was our blitz on third and 8,” Robinson said. “That was the key because after that we had complete control of them. Once we neutralized their five-man patterns in the third quarter, they didn’t score a point.”

The Packers came back to the Super Bowl at the end of the 1967 season and beat the Raiders 33–14. But with the Packers’ core players aging and Lombardi stepping down as head coach, the balance of power would shift very quickly in the NFL—and the AFL was more than ready to take advantage against teams that may have been even better but didn’t have the same standard of execution and were more vulnerable to advanced schematic concepts. 

Super Bowl III

The 1968 Baltimore Colts were supposed to go down as the greatest team in pro football’s history. Don Shula’s team built their success on a vicious, ravenous defense and the MVP season of quarterback Earl Morrall. They finished the regular season with a 13–1 record and crushed the Cleveland Browns, the one team that had previously beaten them, 34–0 in the NFL Championship Game. They allowed just 144 points in the regular season while scoring 402. They went into the third Super Bowl favored by anywhere from 17 to 21 points, and the New York Jets, the AFL’s entrant, seemed like cannon fodder on the way to the Colts’ coronation.

NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle was concerned about the level of competition before the game. Given the Green Bay Packers’ wins in the first two games and a specter of a Colts’ blowout, Rozelle was considering making future Super Bowls contests between the two best teams regardless of league or conference. That would have complicated matters, but as it turned out, the Jets were about to take that matter out of Rozelle’s hands with one of the most stunning upsets in sports history. 

This was not the Jets team many AFL observers expected. Joe Namath had become the first professional quarterback to throw for more than 4,000 yards in a season in 1967, but he was not nearly as productive in 1968—he threw for 3,147 yards, completed just 49.2 percent of his passes, and failed to throw a touchdown pass in six consecutive games from October 5 through November 10. Defensive end Gerry Philbin is fond of intimating that Namath’s off-field pursuits had caught up with and surpassed his on-field dedication. Still, speed end Don Maynard and wily possession receiver George Sauer each exceeded 1,000 yards on the season.

But the two reasons the Jets made and won the Super Bowl for the first and only time in franchise history were their rushing attack led by Matt Snell and Emerson Boozer and an out­standing defense that went very much under the radar. Philbin was the team’s primary sackmaster. Film study has shown that he amassed 19 sacks in the 1968 regular season. And the secondary—led by cornerbacks Johnny Sample and Randy Beverly—was exceptional. The Jets ranked second in the AFL behind the Kansas City Chiefs with 28 interceptions, second behind the Houston Oilers in passing yards allowed with 2,168, and allowed a league low 3.2 yards per rushing attempt. 

The game was more of a tough guy slog than an aerial battle. The Colts stopped the Jets out of the gate with their own stellar defense, but when the decision was made to focus more on the ground game than Namath’s arm, the Jets established their dominance by throwing the advanced version of the playbook out. Namath’s 39-yard pass to Sauer with a minute left in the third quarter was the last pass he threw in the game. Up 16–0 the Jets wanted to control the ball and they were moving very well against Baltimore’s defensive line. On New York’s second-quarter touchdown drive, the Jets kept calling the same run play over and over because Baltimore couldn’t stop it—and no matter the era, that’s one of the most convincing ways to dominate your opponent. “It was the same play we had called for the whole series—up and down the field,” Snell said. “Weeb called it 
19 straight
, which meant that I had the option to break the play any way I saw it. I would look at Boozer’s block through [left tackle] Winston Hill. If Winston blocked his man out, Boozer would lead through the inside on the linebacker. If Winston hooked his man, Boozer would lead outside. George Sauer ran [cornerback] Lenny Lyles off. By the time [linebacker] Mike Curtis got over there, I was in the end zone.”

If there was one game that perfectly personified the perception that the NFL was the inflexible league while the AFL was the league of adaptability, it was Super Bowl III. Shula believed in execution as opposed to adjustment, so as the game dragged on for the Colts, the adjustments that should have been made weren’t. “They ran at me about three times,” Colts Hall of Fame end Bubba Smith said. “At halftime I said, ‘Let me go over center. I can stop Snell there.’ Shula said, ‘Just play your fucking position.’”

As for Morrall, he was experiencing his own disasters. The Colts actually outrushed the Jets 143–142, but it didn’t matter because Morrall completed just 6-of-17 passes for 71 yards, no touchdowns, and three back-breaking interceptions. These picks, and the option pass that should have worked in Baltimore’s favor, made the difference in the game. Morrall was so atypically bad that conspiracy theorists, who believe that Super Bowl III was fixed to give the AFL the appearance of equality, point to his game as the primary evidence.

In truth Morrall’s nightmare of a day came down to excellent preparation by defensive coordinator Walt Michaels and New York’s defensive backs. Morrall’s first pick happened in the red zone, when a six-yard pass to tight end Tom Mitchell went off Mitchell’s hands and into the awaiting arms of Beverly. The second pick came when Sample read a slant to receiver Willie Richardson in the end zone based on a circle route run in the backfield by fullback Jerry Hill. Sample had seen that route combination on film and jumped the route at the Jets’ 1-yard line.

Morrall’s third pick and the weirdest play of the game came when the Colts tried a flea flicker near the end of the first half. Morrall handed the ball to halfback Tom Matte, who threw the ball back to Morrall behind the line of scrimmage. Earlier in the season against the Atlanta Falcons, this had worked for a long touchdown to split end Jimmy Orr, who worked his way downfield uncovered as the Falcons tried to suss out Baltimore’s backfield trickery, and Morrall threw for the easy score. 

This time Orr was wide open downfield again, but for whatever reason, Morrall turned and threw over the middle to Hill, who ran a slant. Safety Jim Hudson was all over Hill and came away with Morrall’s final mistake. Even as Morrall released the ball, you could hear broadcaster Curt Gowdy saying, “They’ve got Orr wide open…nobody within 15 yards of him!” 

Matte later said that Morrall didn’t see Orr open because the Colts’ marching band was behind Orr and ready to come onto the field for halftime. Orr had a blue and white uniform, the band had blue and white uniforms, and that was that. “People say Jimmy Orr was wide open,” Michaels later said. “I’ll take you into plays in every professional football game where a defender will slough off his coverage, and a receiver will be wide open. That’s fine. Let the quarterback see him every time. This became obvious when the cameras were on the play. There were about five ifs. If Earl was smart enough. If he would have seen it. If he had that much time. Nobody wants to give my cornerback, Randy Beverly, credit for the fact that he could run 4.3 and probably would have been back in time.”

Sample agreed, pointing to a general lack of velocity in Morrall’s passes. “I told all the other defensive backs—he’s not going to throw the ball deep because he doesn’t have that kind of arm,” Sample said. “And even if he does try to throw the ball deep, there’s going to be a hump in the ball; it won’t be on a line. And you’ll have a chance to react and go and catch the football. That’s the advantage we had on him—we knew what he could do and what he could not do.”

Whatever the reason, the Colts became the personification of the NFL’s greatest fear in that 16–7 loss—the first NFL team to lose to the younger and supposedly inferior league. Namath countered Baltimore’s blitzes with short passes, turned to other targets when the Colts double-teamed deep receiver Don Maynard, and blew apart the right side of Baltimore’s defense over and over with old-school fullback lead runs. This was no fluke—this was an AFL team showing its superiority over one of the best NFL teams ever. Now, with one season left in the AFL’s future, a man who had been in the league all along would have his ultimate vindication.

Super Bowl IV and Hank Stram’s Multiplicity

Hank Stram didn’t just have to suffer the indignity of losing the first Super Bowl and hearing Vince Lombardi’s remarks about the inferiority of his league. He also had to wait a while to get back to the big game. The Kansas City Chiefs missed the playoffs entirely in 1967 with a 9–5 record and then were demolished 41–6 by the Oakland Raiders in the divisional round of the 1968 postseason. Seeing the Raiders lose to the New York Jets in the AFL championship and the Jets winning Super Bowl III did give the next (and final) AFL entrant hope for the 1969 season. The Chiefs would be that entrant, though they faced more than enough challenges to get there. 

Len Dawson started just seven games in the regular season due to a knee injury, but with decent quarterback play from backups Mike Livingston and Jacky Lee and a tremendous defense, Kansas City finished with an 11–3 record. Then it had to wade through the previous two AFL champions to even get to Super Bowl IV. The Chiefs beat the Jets 13–6 in the divisional playoff and overcame the Raiders 17–7 in the league championship. Then they had to face a Minnesota Vikings team built much like the 1968 Baltimore Colts with a veteran quarterback (Joe Kapp), a defense that was strong in all facets, and a risk-free approach that focused more on execution (and Kapp’s occasional improvisation) than schematic trickery. The 1969 Vikings led the NFL in both points scored and points allowed, so if the Chiefs were to pull this off, they’d have to bring their best.

And if Stram was going to lose another Super Bowl, he certainly wasn’t going to do it without a ton of play-calling diversity. The Chiefs went into Super Bowl IV with 18 basic plays and a set of 66 formations they’d used in the regular season. To the execution-based Vikings, this was some kind of sorcerery—stuff they didn’t see from their NFL opponents. In the first Super Bowl, Stram had no real answers after the Packers’ blitzes blew apart his five-receiver schemes. Now, he would bring to the field at Tulane Stadium all kinds of stuff the Vikings couldn’t counter, including the moving pocket, the Tight End I, and an improved stack defense that would give him a perfect plan to foil Minnesota’s efforts.

The moving pocket was something that Stram and Dawson had perfected by the end of the decade. Again, this wasn’t just Dawson scrambling. He was moving to specific locations between the tackles to get different throwing lanes, to cut the field in half, to make reads under pressure easier, and to force the defense to play a wider pocket when bringing that pressure.

The Tight End I was a big deal in Super Bowl IV. Stram would line one of two tight ends up behind Dawson with the fullback and halfback behind the tight end. Pre-snap the tight end could stay put to block, run his route from the backfield, or motion to the edge of the line while the backs stayed in an I formation (directly behind the quarterback). The Chiefs also could switch to a pro-set formation, in which the tight ends aligned to either side of Dawson and a few yards back. The whole idea here was to present a dizzying array of pre-snap formations to set the defense on its heels. This is a common construct in the modern NFL, but in early 1970, not so much. “When we reduce the other team’s read-and-react time, we feel we have an edge,” Stram said in 
Pass Receiving in Early Pro Football: A History to the 1960s
. “We also feel we will force them to play a normal defense. They can’t overshift because they don’t know what the formation will be; they can’t locate the tight end. We, in effect, freeze them—and pick up another edge.”

AFL defenses were used to Stram’s Wild West Show, but the Vikings proved early in the game that they either hadn’t studied Kansas City’s pre-snap tendencies or they figured it was high school stuff that could be easily sussed out by the pure talent of their defense. More tellingly, Bud Grant’s team went into Super Bowl IV without a single man in motion or pre-snap shift. Minnesota’s philosophy was to line up and go at ’em, but they didn’t have the gap discipline of the Lombardi Packers, and Stram’s Chiefs had ascended to a different level in both talent and schematic multiplicity, which was necessitated by the ever-expanding defensive concepts common in the AFL. “We feel that if we can complicate the recognition responsibility for the other teams, then we have created doubt and indecision, and the opponent is more apt to make mistakes,” Stram said of his general philosophy. The Vikings certainly felt the pain of this in Super Bowl IV—over and over, as Stram’s schematic brilliance was the dominant story.

Or it would have been the dominant story had NFL Films founder Ed Sabol not gone to Stram’s hotel room the night before the game and asked him to be the first head coach miked up for a Super Bowl. After some back and forth and the nebulous promise of a $1,000 “honorarium” for Stram, the coach agreed to do it. The result was one of the best bits in NFL Films history and a fascinating look into Stram’s sideline manner. Dawson, who was used to calling the plays in the huddle after discussing a series on the sideline, was a bit curious as to why Stram kept feeding him the plays. He didn’t know for sure until the official Super Bowl IV highlight film came out months later. Stram used a malapropism to exhort his players to “keep matriculating the ball down the field,” opined that Vikings linebacker Karl Kassulke was “running around there like it was a Chinese fire drill,” and espoused the virtues of the play that would lead to Kansas City’s first touchdown of the afternoon: the now legendary 
65 Toss Power Trap
.

The Kansas City Chiefs’ 
65 Toss Power Trap
 during Super Bowl IV

It was a relatively simple play designed to use the aggression of Minnesota’s “Purple People Eaters” front four against it. Left tackle Jim Tyrer kicked out to the edge, influencing the right defensive end Jim Marshall to think that a sweep was coming. On this play, though, it was tackle Alan Page who took the bait, leaving a huge gap for Garrett as tight end Fred Arbanas moved up to block middle linebacker Lonnie Warwick. “I’ve never been hit any harder than Arbanas hit me,” Warwick told 
The
 (Wilmington, Delaware) 
News Journal
. 

Stram said that it was the only time the Chiefs had used the play all season long, and taking Page out of the equation was the focus. “Page was a great player. Quick. Sharp. Alert,” Stram said via goldenrankings.com. “In a short-yardage situation, they would put him between the center and the left guard. If the backs were split, it looked like there might be an outside play to Page’s right. Then, he’d have to get in the gap between the guard and the tackle. If he saw the tackle pull, he was going to run like hell. It worked just like you draw it up on paper.” Stram also called reverses to receiver Frank Pitts, and the misdirection plays further exposed the quickness of Minnesota’s defense.

Kansas City’s second touchdown came in the third quarter, when Dawson threw to receiver Otis Taylor underneath, and Taylor sprinted 46 yards to the end zone. Stram had instructed Dawson to throw short under Minnesota’s zones; such passes would be “like stealing,” the coach exhorted. Dawson threw underneath to Taylor on this particular play against a Vikings blitz much like the one that caused the interception to Willie Wood in Super Bowl 1. This time Dawson and the Chiefs had all the answers.

At no time in the AFL’s history did one of its teams present such an object lesson in scheme and execution to an NFL team. It was an entirely fitting way to conclude the AFL’s 10-year span and it was even more appropriate that Stram was the point man in that final game. He was as responsible for the AFL’s innovative growth as anyone. “I don’t know if there is anything ever new in football, but we were doing things in the ’60s that teams are doing now,” Dawson told 
The Kansas City Star
. “Hank came up with so many new twists and doesn’t get the credit he deserves. He wasn’t afraid to try things. Back in those days, guys didn’t try anything. They pretty much stayed with what the Green Bay Packers or New York Giants were doing. Well, Hank decided: let’s do some things different. We were playing the West Coast Offense before it was the West Coast Offense.”

