# Section 8

---



4. Responding with a Roar: The NFL in the 1960s

“Individual commitment to a group effort— that is what makes a team work, a company work, a society work, a civilization work.”

—Vince Lombardi

As th
e 1960s began, the NFL was still on a high of public awareness from the 1958 Championship Game and working fervently toward its current status as the country’s most popular sport. Before that would truly take effect, however, the old league would have to endure by far the toughest set of challenges it ever faced from a rival league, as the American Football League set its own course that effectively ended in a merger between the two leagues in 1966. At first, the NFL seemed blind to the AFL’s innovations, but by the middle of the decade, that was no longer the case. Buoyed by brilliant innovators and a far more progressive attitude toward race, the AFL caught up quickly and took the NFL to task when it didn’t adapt.

The common myth is that the NFL was a staid, earthbound league in the 1960s in comparison to the AFL, but that wasn’t always the case. The AFL’s Sid Gillman and Hank Stram were two of the most impressive minds in the history of the game, but the old league had its own share of geniuses and was led by the two coaches who would define the decade for the NFL. 

Tom Landry brought the Flex Defense and the shotgun formation to Dallas, and Vince Lombardi’s allegedly simple system in Green Bay was actually a fervently detailed and practiced set of ideas that included the application of option routes for receivers, different splits for linemen, and zone blocking concepts implemented decades before their supposed invention. The Dallas Cowboys also used the first computers to aid in their scouting process and brought different kinds of athletes to the game—and new schemes to the table as a result. 

Both Lombardi and Landry got their NFL start with the New York Giants of the 1950s. Lombardi, the offensive coordinator, was emotional, profane, and took time for his schematic concepts to bear fruit. Landry, the cool tactician, generally was more comfortable with schemes than players and proved to have a legendary gift for innovation. In the 1960s these two men would define the NFL and lay the groundwork for its future.

Vince Lombardi

Vince Lombardi remains for many the example of discipline and sacrifice among all NFL coaches. It’s his name on the trophy given to every Super Bowl winner, and with five NFL championships and the first two Super Bowl wins on his resume after just nine years as the Green Bay Packers’ head coach, that’s a fitting tribute. Lombardi was an ideal distillation of the coach as teacher and was one of the most effective motivators of his era—regardless of profession.

Regarding his schematic influence, however, Lombardi was not an innovator the way Tom Landry was—or the most effective coaches of the AFL were. Instead, Lombardi had a great sense of how to teach the preferred schemes and methods he derived from others. His beloved power sweep was something he ran at Fordham University as one of the “Seven Blocks of Granite” from 1933 through 1936. His rule blocking schemes, an early precursor to today’s zone blocking concepts, was something he picked up as Army’s offensive line coach from 1949 through 1953 and were derived from meetings he had with Gillman at West Point in the late 1940s back when Lombardi was the head coach at St. Cecelia High School in New Jersey. Gillman preceded Lombardi as Red Blaik’s offensive line coach and recommended that Lombardi replace him when he left to become the head coach at Cincinnati.

The pass patterns the Packers ran were more advanced than many people remember in retrospect, but there was nothing about them that put defenses out of sorts from a schematic perspective as Gillman’s and Stram’s did. He wasn’t the innovator that Landry was—very few men in NFL history were—but few if any coaches have been better at taking an entire methodology and making it his own through repetition and education. Lombardi would run a play over and over if he believed it was important and he was a firm believer in the idea that his players should be so well-schooled on everything they did that instinct would take over. For Lombardi the power sweep defined his coaching method more than anything else.

The Packer Sweep

The power sweep wasn’t just Vince Lombardi’s bread-and-butter play—it was a larger personification of his entire belief system about football and about life, that the ability to bend one’s will to the collective good was part of the paradigm of sacrifice that led to success. Decades after his time with the Seven Blocks of Granite, Lombardi still saw himself—and the game—through the prism of the offensive line. “It takes a special kind of man to play on the offensive line,” Lombardi wrote in 
Vince Lombardi on Football
. “He must have the determination and the mental discipline to practice the various blocks constantly. He must be dedicated to perfection and recognize that perfection can be achieved only by the drudgery of practice. There are no shortcuts to success in football. The individual who tries to find them will lose his way. Each day, each player, All-Pro or rookie, must discipline himself mentally and devote himself physically to fundamentals. Only then will his actions become automatic, and his excellence instinctive, as it must be for the offensive linemen called upon in the split point of a second to initiate those blocks that make the offense go. A lineman seldom finds his name in headlines. I know, for I was one myself. The band seldom plays for him, but when he does his job, he knows it.”

Lombardi called his sweep: “The play that the team must make go and the one the opponents know they must stop.” He first came upon the sweep concept when he played for Fordham, playing against the Pitt teams of the Jock Sutherland era. He later dove into the single-wing while attending coaching clinics, and, as he advanced in the coaching ranks, he saw the logic in centering his entire offense around various concepts of choreographed, intelligent blocking schemes. But the sweep was his baby. Lombardi had versions of the sweep that would work against 4-3 defenses, 4-4 stacks, or 6-2 defenses in which the middle linebacker was more of a middle guard. This was not a one-dimensional concept that the Green Bay Packers would have to move away from against this or that defense. Lombardi worked the sweep before and after Landry turned Sam Huff into the first real middle linebacker, and the Detroit Lions were doing the same with Joe Schmidt. 

When John Madden attended a Lombardi coaching clinic in the early 1960s, he was amazed to discover that Lombardi, who Madden idolized, was able to talk about one play—that power sweep—all day long. It was an education for Madden, the relative neophyte, into just how deep strategic thought in professional football had to be. “I saved up everything I had to go up to a coaching clinic, and Vince Lombardi was the speaker,” Madden said in
 A Football Life: Vince Lombardi
. “At this time I was a young coach—I was coaching in junior college—and to be honest with you, I thought I knew it all. I go in and I sit in the back, and this is how stupid I was. And Vince Lombardi talks for eight hours on one play—the Green Bay sweep—talked for four hours, took a break, and talked for four hours more. I left after that, and I said, ‘I don’t know a damned thing.’”

The chestnut NFL Films footage of Lombardi saying he wanted: “A seal here [at the center’s right shoulder] and a seal here [outside the left tackle] and run it…into the alley” was just the tip of the iceberg. Lombardi was able to talk about the sweep in such detail and drill his players and coaches on the fundamentals and macro details of it for hours because it was at the root of his philosophy. “It’s a kind of complex play that looks very simple,” Jerry Kramer said. “There’s a lot of things that have to happen for the play to work well. If they do this, we do that. If they do that, we do this. And we adjust to where the defense goes, so that the defense is almost always wrong, and the back will run to daylight. We ran it to perfection.” 

Lombardi wanted his tight end—what he called the “Y End”—to open his position between six and nine feet from his tackle. Once set, the tight end was directed to “set as on a pass” or to use precisely the same techniques his linemen used to protect the quarterback. The tight end put his weight on his inside foot, keeping his eyes right on the numbers on the defender’s jersey, so that if the lineman or linebacker moves to the inside quickly, he could move his defender down the line. Using momentum—carrying the defender where he was already going—was a big part of the tight end’s job.

Lombardi said that the ideal way to run the sweep was to have the defender over the tight end move to the inside. If the defender moved to the outside to avoid getting caught up in the sweep, the tight end was to open with his outside foot, focus his eyes on the defender’s numbers, and block to the outside so that the running back could cut to the inside. If the defender over the tight end got outside penetration, that didn’t bother Lombardi as much because he knew that the pulling guard and the running back’s read to cut back to the inside would take care of that. But allowing penetration to the inside was not acceptable under any circumstances. “Everyone was important in the sweep. It’s really all of life. We have to do things together to make this thing we call America great,” Packers tight end Ron Kramer said in 
When Pride Still Mattered
. “If we don’t, we’re fucked.” 

In Lombardi’s system the sweep could be called either even or odd based on the alignment of the defensive front and linebackers and it was up to the center as to how to call it pre-snap. Depending on the alignment and skill level of the nose tackle, the center could make the even call, which had him blocking the nose tackle directly. An odd call would have the center making the cut-off block on the middle linebacker and the right tackle taking the nose tackle in a reach block. The fullback would take the defensive end instead of the linebacker on that call.

The guards were the keys in the Lombardi Sweep; they were the pullers and the ones who led the run to daylight. The price to pay for that visibility was a complex assignment for both the left and right guard. While the right guard had a more complex physical assignment in working his way up the outside of the formation, the left guard was instructed to pull flat or on a direct line just behind the line of scrimmage. Clearly, the left guard’s first responsibility was to avoid any clashes with the quarterback as the quarterback dropped back; so there was a hurry-up-and-wait aspect to this. Once the left guard cleared the quarterback, he became a gap hunter, looking for the first seam in the defensive line and turning up into that hole for all he was worth. 

The right guard’s responsibility was to pull to the right side of the formation and take the first defender outside the tight end’s block. He was to pull to the right at a 45-degree angle, and his lead leg was supposed to be at a 45-degree angle as he left the line of scrimmage. In addition to that test of strength and athleticism, he also had to be aware of the timing of the fullback’s block upfield. If he wasn’t, the right guard and fullback could collide, leading to a string of Lombardi invectives. So the timing of this play had the right guard moving after the fullback went up to take his defender. Lombardi would sometimes allow his right guard to move inside the tight end’s block or to go further outside to block on the cornerback, but it was always fundamentals before freedom.

The left tackle had what Lombardi called a very difficult assignment—he had to pull deep and move to his right to avoid any possible penetration from the defensive tackle to the left side of the center. The right tackle had to deliver a blow to drive the defensive lineman right in front of him. If there was no defender straight in front of him, the left tackle slammed the defensive end and moved on to the inside of his gap to seal for the middle linebacker.

The fullback was a major player in the sweep; Lombardi had a lot of coaching notes for him. The fullback delivered a drive block to the first defender outside the right tackle. Generally, this was the defensive end, but if the end crashed inside for the right tackle to deal with, the fullback charged upfield to deal with the linebacker to that side. Lombardi directed his fullbacks to align their blocks to the outside leg of the tackle and drive right at the first defender that became visible—whether it’s the defensive end or the linebacker. On an odd call, the fullback would replace the right tackle as the man to take the left defensive end.

Lombardi also told his fullbacks to avoid any circular approach to his blocking target and he denoted this as a common mistake in the NFL of that era. Instead, he taught his fullbacks to go as quickly as possible to their blocks, even cheating up to the line if necessary to get that block and avoid any leakage to that side. As he often said, “Penetration is the one thing we do not want on this play.”

Lombardi wasn’t necessarily interested in speed when it came to the halfbacks who were the primary ballcarriers on the sweep. When he talked about Frank Gifford and Paul Hornung, he spoke of their quickness and intelligence that allowed them to control their styles and use their blockers to their greatest effect. The Lombardi sweep was choreography, and the halfback had to mind his dance steps just like everybody else.

The halfback was directed to lead step to his right and move as quickly as he possibly could in a straight line parallel to the line of scrimmage. He dipped slightly and keyed whether to go inside or outside based on the tight end block. From there it got pretty simple. If the defensive end or linebacker was driven inside, the halfback ran outside and vice versa. As Lombardi wrote, “That’s one of the great advantages to this play. It really has two holes. We are looking for an isolation between the Y end [tight end] and the linebacker and we also want to create an alley between the linebacker and the defensive end. That’s what we’re looking for—the block out by the Y end on the linebacker, the block by the guard on the [defensive back], and the block by the wingback on the safety man. The seal by the tackle and fullback, cutting off pursuit, and the isolation of the Y end and linebacker give the ball carrier two alleys in which to run.”

The weak-side sweep relied on the tight end to block the safety to that side, as the safety might be cheating up to get a quick pursuit to the halfback. The left tackle—the play-side tackle in this case—influenced the defensive end to that side by crashing into the end and then helped seal the weak-side linebacker. The guards reversed their strong-side protections. 

When teams adjusted to the sweep by directing their defensive tackles to crash through the line as the guards pulled, Lombardi would turn to the sucker play—in which the defensive linemen would be given a free gap to run through on a fake sweep, and the ball carrier ran through the vacated gap. The Miami Dolphins of the early 1970s ran a very successful version of this concept. Lombardi pointed to the eight-yard gain late in the Ice Bowl 1967 NFL championship against the Dallas Cowboys. The sucker sweep was a response to Bob Lilly, the Cowboys’ Hall of Fame defensive tackle, and his quickness through gaps. “We lined up in the sweep formation. The ball was snapped,” Lombardi wrote. “Gale Gillingham, the offside guard, pulled hard, the halfback came across hard, and Lilly charged hard. Starr opened up just like the sweep handoff but instead gave the ball to the fullback, Chuck Mercein, who blew into the hole vacated by the defensive tackle, and he got to the 3-yard line of Dallas before he was tackled. It was superb football.”

It was indeed superb and predicated on Lombardi’s intelligence and commitment to his blocking schemes. The common picture of Lombardi as a schematically inflexible coach who had just a handful of plays and didn’t adjust to circumstances is one of the most unfortunate canards in NFL history. Lombardi believed in the fundamental execution of his concepts through repetition, to be sure, but he had wrinkles in his playbooks that are used today. His blocking concepts are very similar to the zone blocking principles of the modern era, and he did at times want his receivers to adjust their routes to the coverage—yet another precursor to modern option routes. 

Yes, Lombardi wanted his offense predicated on the running game, but he also got a ton of deep passes off that rushing attack. From 1959 through 1967, the years Lombardi coached the Packers, no quarterback in either the NFL or the AFL with at least 100 starts could match Bart Starr’s yards per attempt total of 8.19. Starr completed 2,119 passes in that era—10
th
 most in either league. He threw for the seventh most yards with 17,320 and he had the highest completion percentage at 57.9. 

Lombardi and defensive coordinator Phil Bengston, to whom he gave more latitude than anyone else on his staff, had a highly intriguing combination of blitzes when needed, including the all-out blitz on Len Dawson that forced pressure and caused Willie Wood’s game-changing interception early in the second half of Super Bowl I. The Packers were not known for blitzing through the regular season, but when the Kansas City Chiefs were keeping pace with empty backfields and quick passes, Lombardi deployed them. 

He also believed that the New York Jets would beat the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III primarily because of the talents and quick release of Joe Namath—a player who on the surface would seem to be the antithesis of the Lombardi prototype with his white low-cut shoes, Fu Manchu mustache, and well-known proclivity for late-night activity. Far from a mindless dictator, Lombardi eased up on his players when needed and often sent his assistant coaches into Green Bay-area bars to inform his players that the coach was coming and that they’d better skedaddle.

Though Lombardi used zone coverages as did every coach to a greater or lesser degree in the 1960s, he was well aware of the coverage’s limitations. When speaking of the prevent defense, Lombardi presaged today’s offenses with their advanced use of no-huddle snaps. “I’ve often felt, watching my team in the two-minute drill, that it could play a whole game without ever needing a huddle,” Lombardi said. “I know it’s never been done, but I know it could. That would really shake up that defense.”

Lombardi had halfback-option passes and fake sweeps in his playbook and was quite happy to use them as much as possible with halfbacks who could throw the ball. Hornung attempted 49 passes in the Lombardi era, completing 23 for 384 yards…and five touchdowns. 

In the 1966 NFL championship against the Dallas Cowboys, end Boyd Dowler scored a touchdown on a passing play called 
Flood Left X Delay
. This play had the fullback and halfback aligned in an offset I formation to execute a flat/seam combination route, and the halfback carried his fly route upfield while the fullback hung in the flat. Meanwhile, the tight end blocked the strong-side linebacker before releasing into an outside drag route. The split end blocked the weakside linebacker aggressively for two counts and then ran a crossing route to the area vacated by the middle linebacker, who would be keying on the fullback, if everything went as planned. If the middle linebacker stayed put and obstructed the split end, the quarterback could throw to the tight end in the flat. On this play the middle linebacker was held by the movement of the fullback, and Starr threw to Dowler, who scored a touchdown despite the fact that he was flipped in the air by safety Mike Gaechter and suffered a dislocated shoulder when he landed. 

You might not think of Lombardi as the kind of coach who had flood concepts in his playbook, but the volume of his play-calling concepts was greater than is often perceived. “The passing game is practice and it is precision,” Lombardi wrote. “That is obvious. What isn’t obvious is the persistence: the persistence of the practice field, the persistence of the playbook, the persistence of the quarterback and receivers who must read those defenses and read them correctly, the persistence of those unsung linemen up front who must put on those pass blocks and make them stick, the persistence of the end and flanker and back who must run a route precisely to move their defender to clear an area for the receiver to get clear and catch that ball. That’s the passing game and that is why, from original concept to final execution, every phase of the passing game must be perfected to the utmost.”

Lombardi was not about schematic diversity as the base of his philosophy. His philosophy centered around the need for schematic diversity to adjust when opponents countered his perfected plans, and those adjustments were part of the perfection. But mostly, his philosophy centered around the idea that with discipline, toughness, and repetition, a group of men could come together as one to set an entire league on its ear. Lombardi was perhaps the greatest teacher the game has ever known, and that’s why his relative biographical truth as a non-innovator was rendered irrelevant by his ability to command and win. 

Tom Landry

 
Tom Landry was all about schematic invention and diversity—to the point that he is rightfully thought to be one of the NFL’s greatest innovators. He was also a complicated man who, at times, seemed to think of his players as chess pieces that frustrated him by failing to live up to the plan, a phenomenon that is somewhat common. While Vince Lombardi led with a compelling mixture of psychology and intimidation, Landry brought a bit colder touch to the visceral game of football. “Tom is a warm person, but not so much with his players. Sometimes he gets impatient with them, doesn’t pat them on the back. He expects them to do their jobs,” New York Giants head coach Jim Lee Howell said in 
Landry: The Legend and The Legacy
. “He’s so much smarter than most of them. Maybe he should be more of a dope like me. He’s like Paul Brown, a perfectionist. But he’s smarter than anybody.” 

Landry’s regular-season record of 250–162–6 combined with his 20–16 postseason record as the head coach of the Dallas Cowboys from the franchise’s inception in 1960 through 1988 puts him fourth all time in victories for NFL head coaches. He won two Super Bowls, and his teams appeared in 12 NFL and NFC title games from 1966 through 1982. The Cowboys were in 10 NFC Championship Games from 1970 through 1982, and Landry’s teams appeared in five Super Bowls in the 1970s—with all three losses coming in agonizing fashion.

The Cowboys lost the 1966 NFL title game to Lombardi’s Packers when quarterback Don Meredith threw a last-second red-zone interception. That put the Green Bay Packers in Super Bowl I. At the end of the 1967 NFL season, Dallas lost to the Packers again in the legendary Ice Bowl game. Landry was known for a very long time as the coach who couldn’t win the big one, and even when his teams beat the Miami Dolphins in Super Bowl VI and the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XII, the postseason losses remained a ding in his overall legacy that prevented him from climbing to the same mythological heights as Lombardi, who won five NFL titles; Bill Walsh, who won all four of his Super Bowls; or Bill Belichick, who performed perhaps the most impressive feat of winning five Super Bowls in the free-agency era. 

Landry left a legacy that isn’t easy to summarize in bite-size pieces. Clearer is his status as one of the most influential inno­vators in NFL history. In the 1950s he created a defense that is still one of the two base standards for the league decades later. He was partially responsible for the reinvigoration of what has become the league’s most popular offensive formation and he did that in the early 1960s.

More impressively, Landry may have been the most well-rounded coach in league annals because of his ability to see the offensive and defensive structures of his teams equally. He would create, advance, or perfect a concept on one side of the ball, and that would spur him on to an innovation on the other. As a player in the AAFC (All-America Football Conference) and NFL, he was increasingly tasked to relay plays and concepts to his teammates. By the time he became the Giants’ defensive coordinator in 1954, continuing his career as a defensive back as well through 1955, Landry had been a coach in effect for years. 

One prime example of his acumen was the establishment of the 4-3 defense in the 1950s. Detroit Lions head coach Joe Schmidt had experimented with the formation around the same time that Giants head coach Steve Owen was looking to expand on the old Eagle, Stack, and Umbrella Defenses. When Paul Brown came to the NFL out of the AAFC in 1950, it gave the rest of the league a serious need for a more expansive defense. Owen would come up with his own 4-3 variants and, more often than not, direct Landry to detail the new schemes to the players. 

The 4-3 as it’s known today really came of age when the Giants selected West Virginia linebacker Sam Huff in the third round of the 1956 draft. Landry quickly surmised that Huff had the athleticism, temperament, and intelligence to be the ideal rover as the middle linebacker in a 4-3 set—assets in that scheme that are required to this day. With that Landry took team defense into a new era. He expanded on the zone defenses of the day, ensuring that his cornerbacks and safeties covered their receivers and handed them off to each other with impressive efficiency. He tinkered with pre-snap formation as much as Sid Gillman did, and both coaches were decades ahead of their time in that department. 

The Flex Defense, which Landry started using in 1964 and put into effect full time in 1965, was a variant of the four-man front, in which the defensive linemen alternately aligned on the line of scrimmage and a bit behind. Landry came up with it in part to counter Lombardi’s power sweep. “The Flex Defense was a gap defense,” Hall of Fame defensive tackle Bob Lilly said in 
Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes: The Definitive Oral History of America’s Team
. 
“A lot of teams back in those days played a gap defense where the men were actually 
in
 the gaps. They had a defender between center and guard and another one between guard and tackle. The defensive end was out wide, and the linebackers were in the gaps that weren’t covered. Therefore, the guy in front of you knew exactly what you were going to do. But with the Flex, what we tried to do was to disguise it, to keep our strategy from the offensive linemen.”
 

Lilly’s short-area quickness was the key to the Flex’s success against the sweep. Lilly could run past the pulling guard and keep pace with the halfback, preventing the center from blocking him out of the play. When the Cowboys started alternating Flex looks with more standard 4-3 fronts, Lilly found an additional outlet for his rare talents, and Dallas’ defense started to become great.

Landry also augmented his offensive pre-snap motions with an offensive line move he called “the hitch.” Before the snap Landry’s offensive linemen were directed to stand up out of their stances and then return their hands to the field. The idea here was to give defenses pause because they couldn’t see the total pre-snap shift. He revived the shotgun formation and made it a working part of his offense when nearly every other coach in the NFL thought it to be a weird notion. He toyed with slot receivers and slot defenders a full generation before both concepts became 
de rigueur.

Still, Landry had complications to deal with. When he became the Cowboys’ head coach in 1960, he spent the first few years of his tenure trying to assemble the kind of team on offense and defense that could execute his schemes. Lombardi had inherited a team with a ton of future Hall of Fame talent in need of direction, primarily thanks to super scout Jack Vainisi, who had stocked the personnel cupboard before Lombardi’s entrance with names like Bart Starr, Paul Hornung, Jim Taylor, Boyd Dowler, Max McGee, Henry Jordan, Ray Nitschke, Emlen Tunnell, Jerry Kramer, Forrest Gregg, and Jim Ringo. Landry, on the other hand, had castoffs from the other NFL teams and a talent pool further diminished by the arrival of the American Football League in 1960.

So, the early years were a bit rough. Landry’s Cowboys didn’t have a winning record until 1966, the first season the Cowboys tried to upset the Packers in the NFL Championship Game. Landry had the advantage of his own personnel acumen, as well as the Cowboys’ revolutionary use of computers to help them scour the country for ideal talent, but it took a while.

The Packers were Landry’s first 
bete noire
. The Pittsburgh Steelers of the 1970s were his second—the other team that stole the idea of a dynasty away from him and took it as their own. Pittsburgh beat Dallas in two Super Bowls—21–17 in Super Bowl X and 35–31 in Super Bowl XIII. Landry’s teams lost two of the most thrilling championship games in any sport to one of the greatest series of teams of all time. No shame in that, but players on both teams pointed to Landry’s adherence to complexity as an unintentional weakness. “Shoot, there was no big mystery about how to beat the Flex,” Steelers quarterback Terry Bradshaw said in 
The Last Cowboy
. “You throw on first down. The corners were almost always man-to-man on first down because the Flex was geared to stop the run. I almost felt sorry for their cornerbacks. I had Lynn Swann and John Stallworth out there and all I had to do was throw the ball, and they’d go get it.”

Cowboys safety Cliff Harris had his own issues in retrospect. “We overprepared for the Steelers,” he said in 
The Super ’70s: Memories from Pro Football’s Greatest Era
. “We overanalyzed them. The Steelers had a very basic, fundamental offensive attack. Smart, but fundamental and basic, and that’s a real tribute to their coaching staff. On the other hand, we had very complex offensive and defensive schemes. There were a lot of reads and shifts. We outthought ourselves and, as a result, we weren’t as physically aggressive as we needed to be to beat that team. If we’d played the defenses that worked for us the best, we would’ve had better success against them. You had to match the Steelers blow-for-blow, man-for-man. You couldn’t stand there all day and take their roundhouses all day and expect to knock them out with a sucker punch.”

Harris pointed to the preparation for Super Bowl XIII, in particular, as an instance in which the Steelers were able to execute their way through Dallas’ defensive labyrinth. “I was very discouraged by the complexity of the schemes our coaches were preparing for us,” he said. “They overloaded us. Jack Lambert once said, ‘When you play the Cowboys, you feel like they’re trying to trick you.’ There may have been some truth to that statement. Preparation can be a good thing, and it was definitely one of the strengths of the Cowboys of the 1970s. We prepared well and knew teams’ tendencies and went out and demolished them. Three years earlier, in Super Bowl X, our scheme wasn’t nearly as complex, and we played Pittsburgh much closer and could have won the ballgame.”

In the Cowboys’ 1969 divisional playoff loss to the Cleveland Browns, Landry changed the defensive gameplan before the game, alternating Otto Brown and Mel Renfro between safety and cornerback to cover receiver Paul Warfield. The Browns went after Otto Brown, and Warfield caught eight passes for 99 yards. “That just confused everybody, and everybody had a lack of confidence in what we were doing because we hadn’t had the time to get any repetitions on the field with it,” said linebacker Lee Roy Jordan, who played for Landry from 1963 through 1976. “Once you work on something for two or three days and feel like, ‘This is our best plan, let’s go with it, it’s going to work for us,’ then you have to let football players take care of the little things that happen during the course of the game—those one-play deals or an occasional play.” 

After that 38–14 loss, the Cowboys headed down to the Playoff Bowl—a game between playoff losing teams for third place in the NFL, which was played in the 1960s—to face the Rams in Los Angeles, and his players begged him to let them run a less complicated defense. Throw out the Flex, they said, and let us use our instincts. Dallas lost 31–0, and that was the end of that. 

There were times when Landry’s complexities got in the way of the visceral nature of the game, but more often he was able to maximize the potential of his players due to an uncanny instinct for opponent tendencies brought about by a lifetime of obsessive film study. Dick Nolan, who played in the Giants’ secondary from 1954 through 1957 and again from 1959 through 1961, also played his final season in Dallas in 1962. Nolan then coached the San Francisco 49ers from 1968 through 1975 and the New Orleans Saints from 1978 through 1980. He knew Landry very well as both coach and player and once recalled Landry’s absolute certainty when it came to what an opponent would do. When Landry was the Giants’ defensive coordinator, there was a “what if” slogan for which he was known. Nolan and his teammates would test Landry on that hypothetical all the time. “One time, he drove me crazy,” Nolan recalled. “He said a certain thing would happen, and I said, ‘But what if the guy does this instead of that?’”

“He won’t,” was the inevitable response.

“Okay, but let’s say he does. Then what?”

“He won’t.”

“But what if he did?”

Landry looked at Nolan with his usual calm demeanor and insisted, “He won’t.”

Nolan laughed at the memory and said, “He was right most of the time. And if he wasn’t, he wouldn’t admit it.”

Landry was right more often than not because, like Paul Brown and Gillman, he elevated the art of tape study to decipher what an opponent would do. He filled his defensive playbooks with keys or tendencies the opponent would give away in a repetitive fashion. He drilled his players on these keys over and over, though he wasn’t always aware of the ones he was giving away. The most famous example came in the Ice Bowl. Speed receiver Bob Hayes, trying in vain to protect himself from the subzero temperatures in Green Bay, put his hands in his pants before every run play. 

What caused Landry’s demise, and the subsequent regression of the Cowboys in the 1980s, was that Landry stopped innovating, and the rest of the league caught up to him. Advanced from Gillman, Don Coryell had his expansive three-digit passing game and the Roving Y tight end. Walsh had his West Coast Offense, which was to become the new standard in the NFL for the next number of decades. Buddy Ryan brought a new aggression to defensive football with the 46 Defense and the Bear Front, sending seemingly endless linemen and linebackers after the quarterback. The Cincinnati Bengals and Buffalo Bills toyed with hurry-up offenses in different ways. Landry brought mostly the same old songs, and while that worked for a time, it was only because he was so far ahead of the league for so many years. 

Perhaps the most glaring example of the unfortunate fact that the game had passed Landry by came on November 17, 1985, when Mike Ditka’s Bears employed Ryan’s defense to beat the daylights out of Landry’s team in a 44–0 shellacking. It was the worst defeat in franchise history at that time and the first time the Cowboys had been shut out since 1970. Ditka, who served under Landry for 13 years as a player and coach, was not happy about the win because it came at the expense of a man he truly admired. The Cowboys were 7–3 before the Bears debacle; they finished the 1985 season with a 10–6 record and lost to the Rams in the divisional round of the playoffs. 

The Cowboys never had another winning season under Landry. The franchise finished 7–9 in 1986 and 7–8 in 1987, bottoming out in 1988 with a 3–13 mark. Then, Jerry Jones bought the Cowboys and unceremoniously fired Landry in favor of Jimmy Johnson. Like Landry a generation ago, Johnson was a young, brilliant, aggressive coach whose schematic acumen and knack for personnel moves would lead to impressive success. 

It was a sad end to Landry’s career and it can be argued that in the years since Landry hasn’t received the credit he deserves for the concepts he either brought to the NFL, revived, or perfected over time. He wasn’t one to trumpet his genius. More interested in the perfection of the game than the forwarding of his own legacy, Landry was a stoic engineer to the end. But Landry’s influence upon the NFL’s current concepts were as great or perhaps greater than about any coach in the history of pro football.

