# Section 9

---



5. Merged: The NFL in the 1970s

“There’s a philosopher who says: ‘As you live your life, it appears to be anarchy and chaos and random events—non-related events—smashing into each other and causing this situation. And then this happens, and it’s overwhelming, and it looks like what in the world is going on? Later, when you look back at it, it looks like a finely-crafted novel. But at the time? It don’t.’”

—musician Joe Walsh

With t
he American Football League folding into the NFL in time for the 1970 season, the number of NFL teams grew from 16 to 26, and the sheer volume of coaching and player talent saw a spike heretofore unparalleled in the game’s evolution. Unsurprisingly, the decade was rife with innovation, though the long-term effects of those innovations were more subtle than in later times. The game was still about ground and pound and defense to a great degree, but the 1970s saw some of the all-time great iterations of those philosophies. By the end of the 1970s, the NFL shape-shifted into the precursors of the pass-heavy schemes we see today, but there were a ton of hammer and tong games to get the league to that point. At the start of the decade, the game was still about pure power and who wielded it. 

Don Shula

Don Shula was a winner for a long time before he was recognized as such. He was a defensive back for the Cleveland Browns, Baltimore Colts, and Washington Redskins from 1951 through 1957, racking up 21 interceptions in 73 games before starting his coaching career at the University of Virginia and University of Kentucky in the late 1950s and moving up to the NFL as the Detroit Lions’ defensive coordinator in 1962. The Colts hired him as their head man in 1963, and Shula built one of the best defenses of all time in Baltimore. The 1968 Colts defense was the lead dog on a team that went 13–1 in the regular season and destroyed the Browns, the only team to beat the Colts in the regular season, in the 1968 NFL Championship Game. Shula’s Colts were double-digit favorites to take apart the New York Jets in Super Bowl III, but everyone remotely familiar with NFL history knows how that turned out: the Jets earned the first win for the American Football League by a 16–7 margin, and the Colts were on the wrong side of what was then the biggest upset in sports history. 

The following year showed the cracks that loss caused. Baltimore managed just eight wins and missed the playoffs; moreover, Shula found it tougher and tougher to get his message across. Before the 1970 season, Miami Dolphins owner Joe Robbie contacted the Colts about acquiring Shula, a process that ended with Shula moving to Miami, and the Dolphins being penalized their 1970 first-round pick for violating the NFL’s tampering rules. The Colts took running back Don McCauley with that extra first rounder in 1971. McCauley ran for 2,627 yards and scored 40 touchdowns during his 11-year career; Shula won 257 regular-season games and 17 postseason games for the Dolphins over 26 years. It’s safe to say the Dolphins got the better end of that deal.

Shula inherited a fine Miami team in many respects, especially for a young franchise that did not benefit from the league’s later adjustments to help expansion franchises. Shula, through the auspices of Joe Thomas, the general manager from 1965 through 1971, walked in the door for that 1970 season with quarterback Bob Griese; running backs Larry Csonka, Jim Kiick and Eugene “Mercury” Morris; offensive linemen Larry Little and Norm Evans; defensive tackle Manny Fernandez; linebacker Nick Buoniconti; and safety Dick Anderson as starters. The 1970 draft brought defensive backs Jake Scott, Curtis Johnson, and tight end Jim Mandich. Through management of the existing roster and a real knack for picking up otherwise jettisoned players from around the league—the 1970 trade with the Browns for receiver Paul Warfield was particularly lopsided in Miami’s favor—Shula’s Dolphins went 10–4 and lost to the Oakland Raiders in the first AFC divisional playoffs, a huge improvement from 1969’s 3–10–1 mark. In 1971 Miami went 10–3–1 and lost Super Bowl VI to the Dallas Cowboys 24–3. It was a second Super Bowl humiliation for Shula, who told his team after the game that they never wanted to feel like that again. He started the 1972 season, according to Csonka and several other players, by predicting a perfect 17–0 season, which, of course, actually happened.

Shula’s developmental teams, and the perfect team that followed, were typical of early 1970s teams in that Griese only threw when he had to, the run game was the fulcrum of the offense, and the defense, run by Bill Arnsparger, was a combination of man and zone coverage that was more mistake-proof than flashy at any time. Shula was a football fundamentalist above all else and he drilled that into his new charges from Day One. Shula claimed to be about as subtle as a punch in the mouth, and that’s how he ran things. Former Dolphins head coach George Wilson let things go easy, but Shula had his guys practicing four times a day—a move that would cause open player revolt in the modern era. He created a culture of accountability and toughness the Dolphins hadn’t known before, and that combined with the talent on board created the first great dynasty of the 1970s.

Arnsparger’s “No-Name Defense” was recognized as the key to Miami’s success, but the true base of the offense in Shula’s early Miami years was an offensive line that ranked among the best in NFL history and the influence blocking that set things up for Csonka, Kiick, and Morris. Perhaps the finest distillation of that strategy came in Miami’s 24–7 win against the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl VIII—Shula’s second straight Super Bowl win, following the 14–7 victory in Super Bowl VII against the Washington Redskins. Many believe that ’73 team was actually better than the ’72 undefeated version despite the fact that the former lost two games that year. The Vikings’ Purple People Eaters defense was historically great, especially along a defensive line that featured ends Jim Marshall and Carl Eller and tackle Alan Page. It was a ruthlessly fast and powerful front that forced opposing lines into a seemingly unsolvable problem—how can you deal with demon speed and elite leverage at the same time? 

Armed with a terrifically schooled bunch of blockers, Shula decided to use the Vikings’ aggressiveness against them—much like the Kansas City Chiefs had done in Super Bowl IV. Shula had faced more than enough of that in his last Super Bowl loss, when the Cowboys riddled a younger and less disciplined Dolphins defense for 252 yards on the ground, using traps and counters and draws in Super Bowl VI. Against the Redskins the next year, Miami’s defense exhibited correct gap control and angular assignments to crush Washington’s cut-back run game, and Larry Brown gained just 72 yards on 22 carries. Now, it was the offense’s turn to take a great defense to the woodshed with complex blocking concepts that represented a sea change forward from the old Packers power sweep. 

The Miami Dolphins’ cross-block during Super Bowl XIII

Shula had implemented these run schemes before—but never to this level of effectiveness. “Going into Super Bowl VIII against the Vikings, we felt that one of the critical areas of the ballgame would be the ability of our offensive line to handle Minnesota’s great defensive line,” Shula told NFL Films in the game’s highlight reel. “They predicate everything on coming off the ball as fast as they possibly can. We felt that we were going to be able to take advantage of this tremendous quickness by cross-blocking. On our cross-block, our left tackle, Wayne Moore, comes down hard on Alan Page [No. 88]. If [Page] is sliding to the inside, he takes himself out of the play. If he’s sliding to the outside, he’s coming right into the area that [left tackle] Wayne Moore is blocking down, and this nullifies his outside slant. [Left guard Bob] Kuechenberg on this play lets Wayne Moore go first, and then he pulls outside and blocks out on their defensive end [No. 70 Jim Marshall]. The play was very effective, and it’s only because the cross-block was the type of blocking that should be used against these hard-charging defensive linemen.”

Throughout all these plays, the theory was not only that Minnesota’s defensive line could be negated by using its speed against itself, though that was one more common constraint. Shula and his staff also devised ways in which the veteran acumen of the Purple People Eaters could be used to their advantage. “There were two plays we had in the game to take advantage of the experience of Carl Eller and Jim Marshall,” Shula said. “Eller [No. 81] and Marshall have been playing so long. Every time they read the blocking pattern of the offensive line, they react instinctively to this blocking pattern. The play starts out as a trap on the defensive end [Eller], and when the defensive end reads and reacts tough to the inside, the ball carrier, instead of cutting inside, continues to the outside. We made everything look like it was the inside trap play and, when Eller closed to the inside, we still were able to get the ball outside to Mercury Morris, and it was a very effective play. Another way we were able to make the defensive line hesitate was misdirection. The offensive linemen would pull in one direction, and the backs start out like they’re going in that direction, and then Larry Csonka comes back with the football against the flow.”

The Miami Dolphins’ outside running play during Super Bowl XIII

Misdirection was a more common thing—Csonka running against the tide of the line when holes opened up with the flow—but it worked just as well, as did most concepts with a Miami offensive line that should not have been as great as it was. Moore was an undrafted player out of Furman. Kuechenberg was a castoff from the Philadelphia Eagles, who had to find his way with the Chicago Owls of the Continental Football League before Shula came calling. Center Jim Langer was another undrafted player (from another smaller school, South Dakota State). Right guard Larry Little was a free agent who was signed by the San Diego Chargers and then traded to Miami. And right tackle Norm Evans was a 14
th
 round pick of the Houston Oilers in 1965, who was taken by Miami in the 1966 expansion draft. Little became a Hall of Famer, and Langer and Kuechenberg made six Pro Bowls. As Little said years later, it was about working together, fundamentals, and domination. Line coach Monte Clark was Shula’s voice among the front five. 

And in the second half of Super Bowl VIII, when the Vikings looked for all manner of misdirection, the Dolphins reverted to a brutal man-on-man blocking strategy. Minnesota never knew what hit it—figuratively or literally—and the Dolphins won 24–7. It was as decisive a signature win as the Cowboys had been against the Dolphins two years before. “I have never seen a more dominating team than the Miami Dolphins,” Eller told NFL Films. “All afternoon I had the feeling that the outcome had already been decreed on high before we even took the field. It seemed I could hear Scottish bagpipes in the distance, keeping time as they came after us, wave after wave, gaining ground so easily. They seemed to be floating in suspended animation.”

Reality was a bit tougher for the Dolphins as the decade wore on. Thomas was fired by Robbie after the 1971 season. Shula displayed a great deal of personnel acumen while coaching Miami through the 1995 season and becoming the winningest coach in NFL history, but he never won another Super Bowl. 

There were other offenses with great blockers and schemes during this era, of course. The Pittsburgh Steelers of the 1970s, for example, had a trap play that was a thing of beauty. But the Steelers in this decade would become the first NFL dynasty in which the entire defense was the star of the show. 

The Steel Curtain

The two men who started the Pittsburgh Steelers’ evolution from 40-year losers to the greatest team of the 1970s arrived in the Steel City within 24 hours of each other, and it took each of them a while to be valued for who they would become. New head coach Chuck Noll, a former guard for the Cleveland Browns in the 1950s and assistant coach for the Los Angeles/San Diego Chargers and the Baltimore Colts in the 1960s, was officially hired on January 27, 1969, two weeks and a day after the Colts, who had Noll on their staff throughout the 1968 season, were shocked by the New York Jets in Super Bowl III. “I worked with three great men—Paul Brown, Sid Gillman, and Don Shula,” Noll said at his introductory press conference. “I hope something from those three has rubbed off on me.”

It had. Noll was not a motivator; he was a taskmaster. He famously told his players that if he had to motivate them, he would simply get rid of them and get people who did not need that kind of push. Like Shula, Noll played for the Browns in the 1950s; he was one of Paul Brown’s messenger guards, who rotated in the lineup and brought Brown’s plays to the quarterback. And like Shula, Noll had experienced historical disappointment at the hands of the Jets in Super Bowl III. He was Shula’s defensive assistant in 1968, and that Super Bowl loss eclipsed the fact that the 1968 Colts tied the NFL record for fewest points allowed at 144. “Chuck was just a natural teacher,” Shula said of Noll in 2008. “He explained how to do things and wrote up the techniques. He was one of the first coaches I was around that wrote up in great detail all of the techniques used by players—for example, the backpedal and the defensive back’s position on the receiver. He was like a classroom teacher. He used a lot of those techniques as a football coach.”

It was an outgrowth of the Paul Brown approach, and Noll took it with him to Pittsburgh. Linebacker Andy Russell, who had made the Pro Bowl in 1968 as one of the few bright spots on a mordantly bad team, expected more positive praise than he got from Noll. But his new coach dressed Russell down individually for his aggressively undisciplined play and then ripped the existing Steelers team a collective new one in his first training camp speech. “He said, ‘I’ve been watching game films since I got the job,’” Russell told NFL Films. “‘And I can tell you the reason you’ve been losing is not because of your attitude or any of that stuff. The problem is you’re not good enough. You can’t run fast enough, you can’t jump high enough, you’re not quick enough. Your techniques are abysmal, and I’m probably going to have to get rid of most of you. We’re going to move on.’”

Noll wasn’t kidding. Russell was one of five players to make it from that speech to the Steelers’ first Super Bowl at the end of the 1974 season. Joe Greene was obviously one of those players, but as an early holdout, he had raised the ire of the veterans on the team, who couldn’t wait to get hold of the rookie during training camp. Center Ray Mansfield, another veteran and a third member of that five-man survivor crew, was the first to take on Greene in the Oklahoma drill. It was 
mano a mano
. Greene completely demolished Mansfield and put the rest of the offensive line on notice. As fellow defensive lineman L.C. Greenwood, a 10
th
 round pick in 1969 later recalled, you could see those blockers moving as far away from Greene as possible. 

Greene grew up in Texas and he was angry for all kinds of reasons. He was angry at the racism he experienced. He was angry because opponents, going back to his high school days, couldn’t beat him fair and square, so they’d hold him and play mind games. And he was especially angry about the Steelers’ early losing years. It was unsettling at times, but in that anger, Greene showed his teammates that winning was the point of the whole exercise. A less talented man wouldn’t get away with it, but Greene backed up everything he said. 

He brought that unique rage to the field, and it took a while for Noll to get him under control. In Greene’s rookie year, Dick Butkus had poleaxed Greenwood on a special teams play and stood over his man in triumph. Greene walked over to Butkus, screamed a few well-chosen words, and spit right in Butkus’ face. Butkus walked off the field without complaint, and with that, the title of the Toughest Man in Football changed hands. During a loss to the Philadelphia Eagles in 1970, Greene became so frustrated with his own team’s performance—and the fact that the officials weren’t calling enough holding penalties to his liking—that he picked up the ball and threw it into the stands. But he was already a great player, who would soon carve his name in the pantheon of all-time greats. And he was just the first of many such greats to come down the pike in Noll’s first five seasons. “When Noll arrived we became great drafters,” Art Rooney II said in 
The Super ’70s
. “Before that we weren’t. Our methodology was in place, but he was the balance that made the difference. He was very difficult to work with because he was so exacting.” Noll engaged in extensive debriefing sessions with the team’s scouts after practices and had his hand in every aspect of the team’s development. 

The Steelers’ mode of construction wasn’t unique, but it was ridiculously successful. Most teams in the pre-free agency days were homegrown for the simple reason that it was far easier to retain one’s own talent from year to year. And several teams, most notably the 1960s Kansas City Chiefs with scout Lloyd Wells, had started to mine smaller black colleges for talent. This—and the pragmatic sense of equality espoused by head coach Hank Stram—allowed the Chiefs to develop a far more racially diverse roster to highly positive ends. But the combination of Noll, super scout Bill Nunn, and the team’s scouting staff led by then-director of player personnel and now president and co-owner Rooney II put together a list of amazing talent from 1969 through 1974. That final year was unquestionably the best single draft class in NFL history. 

Greene, Greenwood, and offensive tackle Jon Kolb came aboard in 1969. The 1970 class added two Hall of Famers—quarter­back Terry Bradshaw and cornerback Mel Blount. In 1971 linebacker Jack Ham and the other two fundamental members of the Steel Curtain front four—Ernie Holmes and Dwight White—came aboard. Running back Franco Harris, key reserve defensive tackle Steve Furness (who came in frequently when the Steelers went to their passing-down sub-packages sometimes featuring three down linemen) were drafted in 1972. Cornerback J.T. Thomas made the roster out of the 1973 draft, which was otherwise unimpressive in comparison, but Pittsburgh made up for that with authority in 1974. Four Hall of Famers—receivers Lynn Swann, John Stallworth, linebacker Jack Lambert, and center Mike Webster—came out of the same draft class. No team before or since can brag of such a haul. The Steelers also found success with undrafted players like unheralded safety Donnie Shell, who came to the team from South Carolina State and made five Pro Bowls and three first-team All-Pro teams while intercepting 51 passes during his career.

Nunn, a former sportswriter and editor for the 
Pittsburgh Courier
, was a big part of the paper’s “Black College All-American” team, which started in 1950. A friend of Art Rooney Sr. talked him into hiring Nunn as a part-time scout, which made Rooney II “pissed purple,” as he put it, because he wanted to hire the scouts. But Nunn proved his specific worth immediately. Not only did he have a fine eye for talent, but he also had contacts at smaller black colleges and opened that pipeline for the Steelers. Eventually, Nunn was responsible for scouting or signing seven Super Bowl starters: Stallworth, Holmes, Blount, Greenwood, Shell, Frank Lewis, and Sam Davis. “Nunn quickly became very important to me,” the younger Rooney recalled later. “At first, it was just his contacts, then it was his insight, then his dry humor. Before long he became a fine scout of all players. His agenda matured. He had to win, no matter if the prospect was black, white, blue, or green.”

So by the time defensive coordinator Bud Carson arrived in 1972, the Steelers had the perfect personnel to run the Cover-2 as a base concept. The base idea of the zone defense wasn’t original; it had spread over multiple teams in the previous decade in the NFL. But for the most part, the root coverage concepts before the Cover-2 were either three-deep zone with a box safety or straight man-to-man coverage. Carson had put together his own defense while he was the head coach at Georgia Tech from 1967 through 1971. He amassed a 27–27 record there and found it tough to replace the legendary Bobby Dodd. But he impressed the exacting Noll during an eight-hour interview. After the talk Carson became the only assistant coach Noll ever hired the same day of an interview. It proved to be a perfect match. 

The Cover-2

Bud Carson shared Chuck Noll’s passion for discipline on the field. His defense only would work through understanding and discipline; this was not a system for freelancers. Noll foresaw an NFL, in which receiver formations and routes would become more complex and he wanted a defensive coordinator who could match this ideology. Back in his college days, Carson had implemented the Cover-2 as a run defense against various option offenses because his cornerbacks were pressing at the line of scrimmage and reading run, and it created what was essentially a nine-man front. When Carson brought the Cover-2 to Pittsburgh, things changed a bit—and became much more advanced. Now, Carson’s cornerbacks would aggressively jam receivers at the line of scrimmage, both forcing those receivers to alter the angles and timing of their routes and creating mismatches in the run game when those receivers were tasked to block bigger cornerbacks. This worked because J.T. Thomas (6
’
1
”
 and 196 pounds) and Mel Blount (6
’
3
”
 and 205 pounds) combined game intelligence, athleticism, and intimidation in perfect doses. 

Cornerbacks in Carson’s Cover-2 were far more than hitmen, though, and Blount took the brunt of Carson’s famous invective early in his career when he freelanced more than he stuck with the plan. Early on, Blount and Thomas wanted to play aggressive man-to-man more than they should have and occasionally found themselves schooled by the game’s better receivers. More specifically, Carson required that his cornerbacks use their physical style of play and athletic talent to re-route the receivers to the safeties. 

Meanwhile, Jack Lambert, who was the key to the Cover-2’s intermediate defensive concepts, proved equally adept at covering a tight end up the seam or attacking a running back through the gaps provided by Pittsburgh’s astonishingly great front four. From his rookie year on, Lambert was asked to do things that players at his position would generally find unusual. “Bud had me do things that middle linebackers had never done before, especially in pass coverage,” Lambert said in 
The Games That Changed the Game.
 “He had me covering tight ends man-to-man, covering halfbacks in a spread formation. He had us doubling wide receivers.”

Bud Carson’s Cover-2 defense

As Lambert noted, such things were not done by his Hall of Fame predecessors like Ray Nitschke, Dick Butkus, and Willie Lanier. And Lambert was a different breed of cat, playing at 6
’
4
”
 and 215 pounds—soaking wet. Not only did Lambert scrape the seam and take tight end and running backs out in coverage, he also read blocking fronts expertly and used an innate understanding of the game bolstered by obsessive film study to blast through and attack ball carriers in the backfield. Perhaps the best example of this came in Pittsburgh’s 21–17 win against the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl X, when Joe Greene was dealing with injuries, and Lambert had to be the one to supply constant heat up the middle. He finished the game with 14 tackles.

Were it not for Lynn Swann’s all-time acrobatic catches, Lambert might have been named the game’s Most Valuable Player. And linebacker Jack Ham could do anything Lambert could do— possibly to an even higher degree. Pittsburgh’s linebackers and safeties rarely had to blitz because the foursome of Greene, Ernie Holmes, L.C. Greenwood, and Dwight White simply overpowered opposing offensive lines. “It was not so much what we did. It was the way we did it,” White said in 
Their Life’s Work: The Brotherhood of the 1970s Pittsburgh Steelers, Then and Now
. “We kicked their asses very thoroughly.” 

And in any great Cover-2 or Tampa-2 defense since then (like the Tampa Bay Buccaneers or the Chicago Bears of the early 2000s), the ability of the front four to disrupt without help from the back seven was of primary importance. It allowed everyone from the intermediate to deep pass defense to stay with their assignments and avoid freelancing. It allowed Andy Russell to develop what he called the “hug-em-up” move, where he pretended to blitz, freezing a releasing back from heading into his designed route. And it allowed Ham (who may have been the best linebacker on the team) to use his incredible field vision and athleticism to shut down even more potential pass plays. 

The Pittsburgh Steelers’ Stunt 4-3 defense

Members of Pittsburgh’s front four have argued with the guys in the back seven for decades as to whether the Steel Curtain refers to the four guys on the line or the entire defense. Certainly, no other part of the defense would have worked without the efforts of what was probably the finest defensive line the NFL has ever seen. Greene was obviously the rock star, and his unearthly combination of strength, burst, and speed to the ball carrier was something the league hadn’t seen before—or perhaps since. Not only was Greene the alpha on the field in a physical sense; he was also in charge of communicating all front adjustments and stunts, and the Steelers of that era stunted a ton. It was hard enough to deal with Greene, White, Greenwood, and Holmes when they stayed put in their usual positions. Trying to keep them at bay when they were moving to different gaps in concert was just about impossible. 

The real Steel Curtain was also hard to attack because they worked so well together, but each member of that front four was different. Greenwood at left end moved like a tight end and was so big (6
’
6
”
, 245 pounds) that White used to say that when you wanted to block him that you had to decide which half of him to start with. But White at right end was an even bigger, more riotous player. He came to the field with a tank-sized chip on his shoulder. It was White who would dispense 
bon mots
 such as: “You can take this ass-whooping any way you like, but you’re gonna take it!” And right tackle Holmes at 6
’
3
”
 and 260 pounds may have been the most frightening of them all. With his thousand-yard stare and forward-facing arrowhead shaved into his hair, he looked like a Bond villain. He was not as fast and flexible as Greene, though he was every bit as strong and perhaps even stronger. At the start of the peak of the Steel Curtain’s efforts, Greene came up with a tactic that raised the stakes even higher.

The Stunt 4-3

At some point in 1974, Joe Greene proposed to defensive line coach George Perles that he should position himself at the shoulder of the center at a 45-degree angle in order to blow through any blocks and devour any ball carriers in his path. Bud Carson and Chuck Noll obviously had to sign off on it and they did so after seeing how Greene was able to saw through centers and guards in practice. Greene became an even more unblockable force than he had been before, and what became known as the “Stunt 4-3” was born. “This offset alignment was something Joe developed himself out of frustration,” Andy Russell said in 
The Games That Changed the Game. 
“He hated to get blocked and wanted to make plays. So it occurred to him that because he was so quick, he should just line up inside between the center and the guard, tip his shoulder sideways, and when the ball was snapped, he’d dart through the hole. He was supposed to line up on the guard. [But] he jumped in the gap between the guard and center, tilted his body, and just blew through that gap, and it was devastating. It was beautiful to see.”

Perles further explained the strategy in the book, 
Defensive Football Strategies
. “We take our strong-side tackle and put him in the gap between the center and the guard,” he said. “He gets into a stance that allows him to hug the ball. He keeps his inside leg back to a point where we don’t worry about lining up offside. Normally, we can hug the ball [in formation space] as much as we want. Since the center can’t back off the ball, he can’t do much about it.”

The Pittsburgh Steelers utilized Greene in the Stunt 4-3 more and more through the 1974 season but really unleashed him against the Oakland Raiders in the 1974 AFC Championship Game. It would become the entry into Pittsburgh’s first of four Super Bowl titles in a six-year stretch, but it wasn’t going to be easy. Oakland led the league in points scored and point differential in 1974 and had derailed the two-time Super Bowl champion Miami Dolphins the week before in the divisional round. 

It didn’t take long for the new scheme to provide dividends. On the third play of the game, Raiders quarterback Ken Stabler took a standard seven-step drop and found Greene all over him before he could scan the field and go through his reads. Greene had beaten the double team of center Jim Otto, a Hall of Famer in his own right, and right guard George Buehler, of whom teammate John Matuszak said in 
Cruisin’ with The Tooz
, “We felt that he blocked Joe Greene better than anyone in the league.” Not in this case. Otto and Buehler rose from the snap to double-team Greene, but Greene not only came off the ball in the stunt angle, he also turned his shoulders to make himself smaller and therefore even harder to block. He threw Otto to the ground, karate-kicked his way past Buehler, and came away with a sack of Stabler as his reward. “One moment, Greene and Otto were head to head and then they formed a blur together, and then Otto was more or less where he had been, only lying down,” Roy Blount Jr. wrote. “And Greene was entangled with the Oakland backfield in a pile.” 

The Raiders tried different strategies—cut blocks and traps were the order of the day—throughout the game to deal with a Stunt 4-3 they really hadn’t seen before, but Greene was simply too fast and too strong for enemy blockers to deal with. That was true before, but the Stunt 4-3 turned Greene into a next-level force. One advantage the Stunt 4-3 presented (and still presents to this day) is that it forces offensive lines into geometric equations they aren’t equipped to handle. “It’s really been around more than you noticed,” Seattle Seahawks head coach Pete Carroll told me in 2013. “It’s just a style of play. Some guys are better playing square-shouldered, and some guys can play cocked like that. Brandon [Mebane] has a good feel for that and he utilizes it really well. It’s really a style of player, and our coaching is looking for what guys do well. Brandon does a really good job when he’s offset like that.”

That alignment was part of the Seahawks’ defense even before Carroll showed up. Mebane said that he learned it years before from teammates Rocky Bernard and Chuck Darby before taking it to a new level when Dan Quinn and Carroll got hold of him. “It just provides a good view,” Mebane said simply of the technique.

However, it’s a misnomer to say that the Steelers’ Cover-2 exactly resembled the Cover-2 concepts implemented in the 1990s through today. Befitting the run heavy offenses of the time, Pittsburgh’s base formation on run downs looked more like a six-man front pre-snap with Russell and Jack Ham at the line, allowing the two linebackers to respond accordingly to backs either moving out of the backfield to catch screens and swing passes or help with run support. Now, you’ll see far more of the 4-3-4 setup Pittsburgh used as a passing defense. 

Safety Mike Wagner said that the two teams that gave the Steelers of the 1970s the most trouble on defense were the Cincinnati Bengals of Paul Brown and Bill Walsh—because of the timing-based passing game that presaged the West Coast Offense—and Tom Landry’s Dallas Cowboys because of their combination of raw talent and endless motions and shifts. These days, most offenses present a truly kaleidoscopic series of pre-snap problems for opposing defenses to solve, but such things were far less common back then. “They always tried to shake us up, but our coaches insisted we wouldn’t let any offense dictate what our defense did,” Wagner said in 
The Super ’70s: Memories from Pro Football’s Greatest Era
.

Landry was one of the first NFL coaches to use pre-snap motion specifically to discern whether defenses were playing man or zone, and it was a brilliant response to the increase in zone-based defenses throughout the 1970s. The Bengals did the same, and Walsh began to build that same offensive mind-set with the San Francisco 49ers that would allow him to dominate the next decade.

It was generally a tough play for opposing defenses to read because of the formation and conceptual diversity. As exemplified in Super Bowl X, the play design was meant to fool the defense in multiple ways. Both Cowboys guards pulled after the snap. Left guard Burton Lawless did a little bucket step move to get in front of Roger Staubach and keep him protected, while right guard Blaine Nye pulled out to the right edge to stay in front of running back Preston Pearson, who motioned pre-snap from the left slot to the backfield in a pro-set, split-back formation. Fullback Robert Newhouse power blocked his way up the line. Preston Pearson was in a position to take a screen pass, which forced safety J.T. Thomas to keep one eye on him, and Drew Pearson exacerbated Thomas’ assignment by running an inside over route from his initial position outside. With Thomas on a string and Pittsburgh’s safeties playing back, Pearson had a wide berth to the end zone. It was the first touchdown the Steelers had allowed in the first quarter all season.

Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Drew Pearson’s first-quarter touchdown in Super Bowl X

Based on their pregame examinations of the Dallas offense, the Steelers knew what was coming. They just couldn’t stop it in this case due to a specific miscommunication. “The Cowboys scored on a play, which we had studied, and I said, ‘Gee, I think this play’s going to happen with this formation,’” Wagner later recalled. “I’m trying to check out of the formation, and it was very noisy, so I wasn’t comfortable that everybody was getting the checks. So as a safety, I decided to play it safe and I just backed up.” Wagner then espoused a simple belief from then on: “If they run this play again, I’m not going to hesitate. I’m going to go.”

That proved to be true, and Wagner’s fourth-quarter interception of a Staubach pass from the same formation proved his ability to read the play, Carson’s ability to adjust, and the Steelers’ ability to bring their best in the biggest moments. With 8:32 left in the game and the Steelers up 12–10, Dallas tried to go back to the well with the same idea. This time Wagner cut into the zone void exploited by Pearson in the first quarter and came away with a vital interception that led to a Roy Gerela field goal and a 15–10 lead. “It was our bread-and-butter play all season,” Staubach later said. “It was the first time it didn’t work.” 

The Cowboys mounted their own furious comeback effort in the final moments, but Pittsburgh won the game 21–17 and had their second straight Super Bowl victory in check.

In the end that was the greatness of Carson’s Cover-2—the capacity for adjustments in a highly disciplined structure. This was no vanilla zone defense with a handful of checks. Lambert told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1974 that the Steelers had 30 different defensive situations in which the linebackers provided coverage, and Carson was legendary with his checks—pre-snap adjustments based on offensive formations and tendencies.

In that era most defenses would check to a basic zone in certain instances, but Carson’s modus operandi was far more complex. The base defenses were numbered: “Defense No. 1,” “Defense No. 2,” and so on, but what Carson did not want was for his defenses to respond to pre-snap motion. He wanted his defenses to dictate the action at all times. Russell told of an instance in which the Steelers were facing the Bengals in the ’70s, and Carson decided in the pregame tunnel to change all the checks he had given to the team on Friday. Then Carson told Russell that he believed Bengals offensive coordinator Bill Walsh was getting too much of a feel for what the Steelers were doing on defense. (Given Walsh’s obvious football genius, that’s entirely possible.) So for the rest of the game, Carson had his defense alternating the Friday checks and the Sunday checks on every series. “I’m not saying we were a bunch of rocket scientists, but if you didn’t have some relatively smart guys on defense, we couldn’t have done this,” Russell said. He once told Walsh what had happened during that game, and Walsh was incredulous. “Now I understand why I couldn’t figure out what you guys were doing,” the great coach replied. 

The apex of the Steel Curtain defense came in 1976, ironically a year in which the Steelers did not play in one of their four 1970s Super Bowls. In that season Pittsburgh pitched five shutouts in a 14-game season and allowed just 28 total points in its last nine games. However, Terry Bradshaw missed time in the first month of the season, the Steelers had to overcome a 1–4 start as a result, and both Franco Harris and Rocky Bleier were unavailable for the 1976 AFC Championship Game against the eventual Super Bowl champion Oakland Raiders. 

From 1978 through the end of their reign, the Steelers would be as much or more about offense as defense, as rules changes allowed a new focus on the passing game, and the Steel Curtain aged without proper reinforcements. The early 1980s saw Noll move to a 3-4 defense to try and adjust to changing personnel in the college game, which was certainly a different philosophy than the one espoused back in the day when the Steelers had a decided advantage as a result of their awareness that small black colleges were teeming with NFL talent.

Tony Dungy, a reserve defensive back for the Steelers in 1977 and 1978, later took Carson’s and Chuck Noll’s philosophies about the Cover-2 defense and modernized them into the Tampa-2 system that took the league by storm in the late 1990s and early part of the new millennium. But in the moment, the 3-4 defense was about to have its way as a base defense for the first time in league history.

The 3-4 Defense 

They say that history only remembers the winners, and that’s certainly true in an unfortunate sense for two of the most interesting and successful teams of the 1970s—Chuck Fairbanks’ New England Patriots and Bum Phillips’ Houston Oilers. Neither team made the Super Bowl in the decade, but regardless of the vagaries of fate, each team brought different strains of the 3-4 base defense to the NFL and opened up the future of defensive play in truly groundbreaking ways. 

From its invention by Tom Landry in the 1950s through the early 1970s, the 4-3 defense was the preferred base attack for most, if not all, professional teams. It was one thing the two leagues had in common in the 1960s. There, though, were a few schematic stragglers in the AFL. The Kansas City Chiefs of the late 1960s liked to use Junious “Buck” Buchanan, their 6
’
7
”
, 270-pound tackle, in different gap concepts (especially the over stack or Triple Stack front that hung a variable lineman/linebacker on the edge, depending on the play), and the Oakland Raiders occasionally dropped end Dan Birdwell from the line to a linebacker position. Nobody in the NFL was using the 3-4 as a primary down-to-down defense until two men in the AFC—Fairbanks for the Patriots and Phillips for the Oilers changed that—in 1974. And Miami Dolphins defensive coordinator Bill Arnsparger had a huge impact as well.

The 53 Defense

Bill Arnsparger is best known for his time as the Miami Dolphins’ defensive coordinator under Don Shula from 1970 through 1973 and again from 1976 through 1983. He was a great coach in other places at the high school, college, and pro levels, but it’s his time with the Dolphins that bore the sweetest fruit from a historical perspective. Arnsparger and Shula first met on Blanton Collier’s Kentucky staff in 1959, and when Shula became the Baltimore Colts’ head coach in 1964, he tabbed Arnsparger as his defensive line coach. A promotion to defensive coordinator came soon after, when Charley Winner was asked to coach the St. Louis Cardinals before the 1966 season, and Arnsparger took his place. It was Arnsparger who helped Shula construct the 1968 Colts defense that tied the NFL mark with 144 points allowed in a 14-game season, a feat long forgotten after Baltimore’s loss in Super Bowl III, and it was Arnsparger who followed Shula to Miami, when he took the Dolphins job in 1970. The 1972 Dolphins defense, the epicenter of the only undefeated team in NFL history, is thus credited equally to Arnsparger and Shula. The 1973 defense may have been even better—it allowed an unbelievable 15 touchdowns all season. But for our purposes, Arnsparger’s primary achievement was the installation and execution of the 53 defense—a precursor to the 3-4 base defenses that would follow in the NFL.

In 1971 Arnsparger was the leader of a defensive squad that was coming together very nicely and had most of the root personnel that would help create the NFL’s only perfect season. But before the ’71 season, the coach had a problem—injuries had depleted his personnel and he had to adapt quickly. Defensive end James Riley was out of the picture, and Arnsparger saw something in linebacker Bob Matheson. A first-round pick of the Cleveland Browns in 1967, Matheson was betwixt and between with his first team, but Arnsparger told Shula to pick him up for very specific purposes. “The Browns played Bob at middle linebacker, and he was one of the best players in the league at that position,” Arnsparger wrote in 
Arnsparger’s Coaching Defensive Football
. “Later, he added weight to the point that they virtually gave up on him as a linebacker and tried to use him as a defensive end. It was at this point that he became available to us. Bob joined us, and I immediately began meeting with him to catch up. Because of his background and intense desire to succeed, he was a success almost immediately.” 

Arnsparger named his new defense the “53” because it was Matheson’s number. This meant that the Dolphins used a front that looked like a 4-3 but with Matheson as a blitzer from the line in a three-man front. Matheson was a linebacker at the line with his hand off the ground but could bring additional end-style pressure from the strong or weak side. Eventually, as Arnsparger began to realize the value of the moveable chess piece he had, Matheson also blitzed from the inside. 

Bill Arnsparger’s 53 defense

It was a 30 Front defense with a nose tackle and two ends and Matheson in a strong-side linebacker/end designation. The TED and MIKE linebackers—the inside guys—flowed to the action and kept the middle of the field patrolled. The weak-side linebacker disguised his alignment depending on the call, stayed alert for the crack-back run concepts, and each linebacker was directed to play pass coverage in certain instances. It was a tremendously flexible system made great by the personnel Shula and Joe Thomas had put together. 

There were other iterations of the 53. There was a 39 Over defense, in which Matheson, the right end, and the nose tackle either played their gaps against the run or blitzed against the pass. The 37 Over defense called for the TED linebacker to blitz. The 38 Under front was a variant of the 39 Over except that it was the nose tackle and the weakside linebacker who either played their gaps or blitzed, depending on the situation. The 36 Under call had the nose tackle and the MIKE linebacker blitzing if it was a pass. 
Roger
 and 
Lou
 calls were implemented against run heavy offenses or in predominant run situations. These were the even fronts, in which defenders would flow to the ball. It was a great advancement of previous instances, in which coaches directed their linemen and linebackers to force more diverse blocking schemes with their own multiple gap and attack ideas and it set the pace for the 3-4 base defense. 

The Base 3-4

Chuck Fairbanks and Bum Phillips switched their fronts for different reasons, though both got the idea from the same source. Both men coached in Oklahoma before they hit the NFL—Fairbanks was Oklahoma’s head coach from 1967 through 1972 before the New England Patriots hired him in 1973, and Phillips was an assistant at Oklahoma State before he was hired as the Houston Oilers’ defensive coordinator in 1974 and promoted to head coach in 1975. It’s no surprise that the impetus to bring the 3-4 to the pros came from two men who spent time in that state, as Oklahoma coaching legend Bud Wilkinson is the man most often credited with the invention of the 3–4 base defense, and Fairbanks learned it directly from Wilkinson.

As the 1970s began, the 3-4 defense was 
de rigueur
 in college football and thus it became more and more difficult to find the four down linemen it took to maintain a top-level 4-3 base front. “It was a move we had to make because of the depth on our team,” said Phillips, who had actually tried to use the 3-4 with the San Diego Chargers in the late 1960s, much to Sid Gillman’s dismay. “We could find four good linebackers—even if we had to use free agents. But you can’t find many really good defensive linemen, and we only had two. And if you only have two, you’d better play a 3-4 rather than a 4–3. If you’re stubborn and stick with a 4-3, then you’re in trouble.”

Fairbanks concurred, and a new strategy was born in the NFL. “At the time everyone in professional football thought of the 3-4 as a prevent defense to be used in passing situations,” Fairbanks said. “Well, we had a shortage of quality, proto­typical defensive linemen. They just weren’t around; 85 to 90 percent of all college teams at that time were using a three-man defensive line. There were far more linebackers available than top quality defensive linemen, so I built a defense that required less of them. I felt it was the only way we were going to have a chance to stop teams.”

As John Madden told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1977, one year after his Oakland Raiders team had switched from the 4-3 to the 3-4: “If your fourth linebacker is better than your fourth lineman, the 3-4 is for you.” Madden and Al Davis had decided to make the change after injuries decimated their defensive line in the preseason. 

In Fairbanks’ first year with the Patriots, he stuck with the standard 4-3 but found that his defense as constructed had no ability to stop the run. New England allowed a league-worst 2,850 yards against the run, and the Patriots finished 5–9. After an offseason of studying game tape comprehensively, Fairbanks decided to make the switch, and his new defense ranked fourth against the run, allowing just 1,587 yards—nearly 1,000 yards fewer in an era when rushing for 1,000 yards in a season was a really big deal. 

The Base 3-4 defense

The difference against the run for every team was immediate for those teams who moved to the 3-4. With four linebackers instead of three, defenses could create new pursuit angles and dictate the action. Each 3-4 defense seemed to have one transformative player who locked the new system in. There was Bob Matheson for the Miami Dolphins. There was Ted Hendricks for the Raiders. Nose tackle Curley Culp, who had played on the Kansas City Chiefs’ odd stacked fronts from 1967 through 1974, was traded for end John Matuszak after Matuszak, a noted renegade, ran afoul of Houston head coach Sid Gillman’s sense of team discipline. Matuszak made his way to the Raiders in time for the 1976 season and, as a 6
’
7
”
, 272-pound end, had a similarly transformative effect as Hendricks did with Oakland’s 3-4. The Denver Broncos had a number of key players who excelled in new positions when they moved to the 3-4 in 1976 after an injury to defensive end Lyle Alzado, but it was a group of linebackers—Randy Gradishar, Bob Swenson, Joe Rizzo, and Tom Jackson—who made that great defense go.

Generally, the linemen up front did not appreciate the switch. Defensive tackles used to splitting blocks and getting through gaps were charged with holding the point so that a more varied palette of front seven defenders could flow through and disrupt, and ends, who were used to flying off the edge, were now dealing with life between the tackle and the guard. The inside and outside linebackers (like it is now) became the rock stars for the most part—especially before the days in which the base 3-4 became more of a hybrid in the 1980s and beyond. “I don’t like the word, ‘sacrificial,’ but that’s what you’d call the 3-4, a sacrificial defense,” Culp said in 1977. “We sacrifice our bodies so the linebackers can make tackles. I guess we’re the garbage collectors. Personally, I don’t particularly care for the three-man front. If you took a consensus of the linemen around the league, I think you’d find that nobody likes the 3-4.” 

NFL coaches liked it, though. Buoyed by the success of the Dolphins, Patriots, and Oilers, the Raiders, Philadelphia Eagles, and Tampa Bay Buccaneers were using the 3-4 as their base defense by 1977. The number of teams employing it would ebb and flow throughout the corresponding decades, but the 3-4 was now a root concept in the NFL and would be so going forward. The advantages were many. Subbing out one defensive end for a linebacker made the defense faster and more adept. Blitz packages were far more variable with four linebackers instead of three, and as Fairbanks, Phillips, and Chuck Noll all intimated, the switch to a more linebacker-heavy defense mirrored the college game and the pipeline to the top. Those advantages—especially the need to blitz more often and with far more complexity—became clearly necessary as the NFL expanded its passing game in the late 1970s like never before.

Before the 1978 season, the NFL put two transformative changes into effect. First, the regular-season schedule expanded from 14 to 16 games. Second, a series of rules alterations to make the passing game easier and friendlier were implemented. The most famous of those alterations became known as the “Mel Blount Rule” after the Steelers cornerback, who was famous for crowding opposing receivers at the line of scrimmage, never giving them an inch of free space as they ran up the field, and punishing them severely if they actually caught the ball. That level of receiver intimidation was a hallmark of the Steel Curtain defense (and every other great defense of the 1970s and before), but teams would have to find new ways to deal with receivers from that point on. 

Now receivers had the first five yards from scrimmage free to develop their routes before defenders could bump and re-direct them. It was a huge difference-maker, especially for teams used to playing against zone defenses and creating openings under those zones. With that one rule change, passing the ball became permissible—advantageous even—in a way the NFL had never seen before. “If it’s enforced, it’s going to open up the passing game as far as crossing patterns and hooks,” Cincinnati Bengals receiver Isaac Curtis told 
The Cincinnati Enquirer
 in 1978. “Now, they can’t take shots and screw up your timing with the quarterback. I don’t have to worry about the linebackers. I don’t have to worry about weaving in and out of traffic. But I don’t even respect it until I see it enforced.”

Oh, it was enforced, and the differences in the NFL’s offensive structure were obvious and immediate. In 1977 teams averaged 12.8 completions and 25 passing attempts per game. By 1979 teams were completing 15.7 passes on 29 attempts per game. The Steelers were perhaps the clearest beneficiaries of the difference between the old and new NFL. Terry Bradshaw went from 2,523 passing yards in 1977, to 2,915 in 1978, and to 3,724 in 1979. The Steelers’ last two Super Bowls of the 1970s featured a passing offense just as definitive as their historically great defense, and now it was guys like Blount who were playing catch-up to their quarterbacks. Several coaches were ready to take advantage of this new guideline, and the two most celebrated—Bill Walsh and Don Coryell—changed the game forever.

Air Coryell

Don Coryell was many things in his 85 years on this Earth. He was an Army paratrooper during World War II, a defensive back for the Washington Huskies, a longtime high school and college coach, the head coach of the St. Louis Cardinals and San Diego Chargers, and, finally, a retiree living a gentle life in the Pacific Northwest. Most prominently, of course, during his time in the NFL from 1973 through 1986, he took the Sid Gillman vertical passing game, added his own rushing formation concepts, and spun the NFL’s passing offense forward a generation. Coryell can be considered the functional link between the deep passing games of the 1960s and 1970s and the West Coast Offense that followed into the 1980s and 1990s. As much as any coach in the history of football, Coryell preached the gospel of the nuanced passing game wherever he went—and wherever he went he got results. “I don’t think there’s ever been a coach who was more courageous about creating offense,” Chargers quarterback Dan Fouts said.

Coryell created that offense at San Diego State from 1961 through 1972, when he developed an explosive passing game that befuddled opponents, got his players into the NFL in impressive numbers, and set the stage for his own NFL induction. He had run one of the first iterations of the I formation backfield at Whittier College before that and showed it to John McKay when Coryell was one of McKay’s assistants in 1960. There, he established the formation that would define USC as the epicenter of collegiate running backs for the next few decades. But when he joined the Aztecs as their head coach, it became about the kind of speed that could open up a vertical passing game that was impossible to consistently defend. “There were a number of reasons why we developed the passing game with the Aztecs,” Coryell told 
The San Diego Union-Tribune
 years later. “We could only recruit a limited number of runners and linemen against schools like USC and UCLA. And there were a lot of kids in Southern California passing and catching the ball. There seemed to be a deeper supply of quarterbacks and receivers. And the passing game was also open to some new ideas.”

Coryell inherited a program on the verge of collapse and turned it around decisively. The Aztecs compiled a 104–19–2 record under Coryell, had three undefeated seasons, and winning streaks of 25 and 31 games. Unusual for a smaller school, San Diego State sent several quarterbacks—Dennis Shaw, Don Horn, Rod Dowhower, Brian Sipe—to the NFL in the 1960s and early 1970s. Then there were the receivers: Isaac Curtis, Haven Moses, Gary Garrison, and Tommy Reynolds. And the list of coaches he developed there includes two Hall of Famers in John Madden and Joe Gibbs, along with Ernie Zampese, Tom Bass, and Jim Hanifan. Dowhower also learned to coach under Coryell’s auspices. The Aztecs moved from Division II to Division I in 1969, and Coryell moved to the NFL in 1973 after the Cardinals hired him.

The Cardinals were one of the original (American Football Professional Association) AFPA franchises (then in Chicago), but their long run hadn’t produced much. Coryell’s new team hadn’t been in the postseason since 1948 and enjoyed sporadic spurts of winning at best. Coryell’s first year there saw the Cardinals match the 4–9–1 mark from the previous season, but the offense improved from 25
th
 to 12
th
 in yards and 23
rd
 to 11
th
 in points. In the next three seasons, St. Louis ranked in the top 10 in most offensive categories and won at least 10 games in each of those campaigns—something the franchise hadn’t done since 1948 and wouldn’t do again until 2009.

Coryell found no issue in adapting his college schemes to the pros. With all the talk about the passing game, there was also a multi-faceted ground attack and an offensive line led by Dan Dierdorf and the infamous Conrad Dobler that kept quarterback Jim Hart upright as well as any front five in league history. In 1975 that line allowed an unofficial total of eight sacks in the entire season, and Hart was on the field for just six of them. “Don’s idea was to pass to set up the run,” Hart said in 
The Super ’70s
. “He wanted to attack the defense and move the chains in an era when teams would establish the run to set up the pass. Don actually wanted to [pass] the ball even more that we did. It was only because of [assistant coach and offensive line mastermind Jim Hanifan] that we ever called running plays.”

 Despite the innovator at the helm, things started to go downhill for the Coryell Cardinals in 1977. Team owner Bill Bidwill was notoriously cheap and let a large number of the team’s best players walk out the door instead of compensating them fairly. Bidwill refused to let Coryell have a serious hand in personnel matters, and things came to a head in January 1978. It was then that Coryell stood Bidwill up when the two men were to have a meeting about the coach’s future; Coryell was on a plane to Los Angeles to inquire about the Rams’ open head coach position. Bidwill responded by refusing to let Coryell out of the last three years of his contract, blocking his potential moves to Los Angeles and San Diego, and eventually locking him out of his own office. “Don saw the handwriting on the wall that nothing good was going to come of staying in St. Louis,” Hart said. “We were very upset that he left. We knew Don was going to be successful wherever he coached and we wanted to be a part of it. His tenure with the Cardinals coincided with my best years, so to say I was sorry to see him go was an understatement.”

Bidwill finally and mercifully fired Coryell in February of that year, replacing him with Bud Wilkinson. “I’d be inclined to seek out an offensive-oriented coach,” Bidwell told 
The News-Palladium
. “I like offense.” Well, he had that before. Wilkinson wasn’t a stick-in-the-mud as he has sometimes been portrayed—he tried to beef up St. Louis’ offense with no-huddle concepts and full-house backfields that were ahead of their time, but Bidwill had already poisoned the water. Coryell, on the other hand, headed back to San Diego. The Chargers hired him to replace Tommy Prothro on September 25, 1978. At that point, the Chargers were 1–3, but under Coryell they finished 9–7 with seven wins in their last eight games. Over the next four seasons, Coryell’s Chargers went 39–18 in the regular season and made the playoffs each year—not bad for a franchise that hadn’t made the postseason since 1965. With Fouts at quarterback and a battery of talented players just waiting for a coach like him, the Chargers of the early 1980s became one of the greatest offenses the NFL has ever seen. It had become abundantly clear that because of his offensive genius Coryell could turn teams around drastically at any level. “He’s a pacemaker, a trend-setter,” then-Chiefs head coach Marv Levy told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1981. “Don was in low-cuts when the rest of us were in high-tops.”

Though his overall offensive structures may have thrown off some of his colleagues at first, that may have had more to do with the fact that in the 1970s the NFL was an earthbound league for the most part, and Coryell, along with Bill Walsh, were bringing different ideas to the field. But painting Coryell as an unbalanced offensive designer solely concerned with his quarterbacks hurling the ball through the air as much as possible would be a complete misrepresentation and a disservice to how balanced his best offenses truly were. In St. Louis, Coryell had fullback Jim Otis and scatback Terry Metcalf, and the Cardinals finished in the top eight in rushing attempts, rushing yards, and rushing touchdowns in both 1975 and 1976. The rushing attempts diminished somewhat in San Diego as the passing offense opened up, but the Chargers ranked first in the league in rushing touchdowns in 1981 and 1982 and fourth in rushing yards per attempt in 1982.

Those numbers were a result of the trade with the New Orleans Saints that brought Chuck Muncie to the backfield during the 1980 season. Then, Muncie was the bellcow, while James Brooks was the Metcalf-style scatback. It was a primary construct of Coryell’s offense to employ two backs until the Chargers started doing revolutionary things with tight end Kellen Winslow and veered to the one-back offense. “The beauty of Air Coryell is it works against any defense,” Chargers fullback Hank Bauer told NFL Films. “You want to pressure us? Fine. You want to stack to stop the run? Fine. You want to be stupid and try to play man coverage outside? Fine. It’s all timing and reads by the receivers and reads by the quarterback. It’s very difficult to defend, and nobody had seen that.”

The stats prove the theory. The Chargers led the NFL in passing every year from 1978 to 1983, a six-year stretch unrivaled in NFL annals. In 1979 Fouts became the second player in pro football history to throw for more than 4,000 yards (following Joe Namath in 1967) when he amassed 4,082 yards. He then went on to best that mark by quite some measure in the next two seasons with 4,715 yards in 1980 and 4,802 yards in 1981. Only a strike-shortened season prevented him from doing it again in 1982, but in that season, he led the league in passing yards for the fourth straight year with 2,883 yards in just nine games. John Jefferson became the first receiver in NFL history to gain more than 1,000 yards in each of his first three seasons. When the Chargers traded Jefferson away due to a contract dispute, Coryell plugged in Wes Chandler, who led the league with 129 receiving yards per game in 1982. In 1985, the year the San Francisco 49ers’ Roger Craig became the first running back to rush and receive for more than 1,000 yards in the same season, it was San Diego back Lionel “Little Train” James who actually set the NFL record for receiving yards by a back with 1,027. Charlie Joiner, Winslow, and Fouts all made the Hall of Fame, and each one of them would tell you that without Coryell, none of that would have been possible.

As San Diego’s passing game became more complex, the Chargers faced more nickel and dime defenses than ever—perhaps more than any other offense had to that time in NFL history. With so many defensive backs taking linebackers off the field, San Diego’s run game became a force multiplier. Backs were also used as read decoys and pawns in Coryell’s offenses. He sent them out on quick screens, so Fouts had that escape hatch if an enemy defense actually did cover all his targets. And it was Coryell’s version of the three-digit passing game that welded everything together.

Coryell’s Three-Digit System

As with many schematic entities throughout the NFL’s history, the origin of the three-digit play-calling system is somewhat nebulous. Don Coryell is recognized as one innovator, though Sid Gillman used it in the AFL. What Coryell did with it made the argument over who was responsible for the “big bang” irrelevant; he took the three-digit system to the point where he could’ve walked into an NFL huddle in the second decade of the new millennium and immediately recognized the calls in many of today’s offenses. 

Y 719
 in Don Coryell’s three-digit system

The three-digit system Coryell developed at San Diego State was out of necessity. As the coach of a smaller college, he had to acquire his players through less traditional recruiting methods. (As an independent college at the time, San Diego State wasn’t under the watch of conferences regarding transfer and eligibility regu­lations.) As a result he often had a new receiver on the field the same week he joined the team. So as opposed to the wordier calls of the time, Coryell devised his own system that designated the routes for his receivers and made things easier for those new charges. That in itself was a nice idea, but what made Coryell’s system special was that the three-digit concept did not decrease the complexity of the route concepts. It was a malleable system that could work with various passing concepts, and that’s why it’s used by many NFL coaches to this day in different iterations.

In Coryell’s system, Gillman’s system, and most of the systems since, the numbers in the play call are based on routes for the backs and the inside and outside receivers. The outside receivers have the same route numbers, while the inside receivers and backs have their own numerical catalogue of routes and numbers. If the outside receivers didn’t mirror their routes, that would be included in the call.

For example, on an 
I Right 54 Y 719
 call, I Right is the formation, 54 is the blocking scheme (54 to the weak side, 55 to the strong side), and Y 719 tells the receivers what to do from right to left. The Z receiver runs a deep 7 route and turns in if there’s zone coverage. The Y receiver (most likely a tight end) runs a shallow 1 route five to seven yards upfield across the formation. The X receiver runs a deep 9 route. It’s a two-back, play-action play. The fullback replaces the Y receiver to front-side pass protect, and the halfback takes the play-fake and heads up between the guard and tackle, whose assignments are covered in the 54 blocking scheme designation. Dan Fouts looked to the Y receiver (let’s say Kellen Winslow) as his first read. The X receiver would be the second read, and the halfback outlet up top would be the bailout. Fouts would see all of this and make his call in the time it took to drop back five steps.

A more likely call, as the Chargers started to spread the field with Winslow away from the formation, would be 
I Right Flex Roll X 388
. Here, the X receiver runs a long crossing route from a wider split, while the Y tight end and Z receiver run their own individual deep 8 routes. The quarterback rolls right and eyes the flexed X receiver as his first read. If the defense comes down on the X, the Y and Z receivers are hopefully open. No matter the call, the quarterback and his receivers were easily on the same page.

I Right Flex Roll X 388
 in the San Diego Chargers’ offense

This stuff was hard enough for defenses to deal with, but it became just about impossible to defend consistently when Coryell added his dizzying motion concepts to the pre-snap phase of the play. In his 1983 playbook, Coryell illustrated the nine objectives of pre-snap movement and why it was a key construct of his offense.

1.	
To create a personnel advantage by creating coverage mismatches on our receivers or backs

2.	
To create a personnel advantage by effecting changes in run support and force responsibilities 

3.	
To create secondary movement in an effort to better enable our quarterbacks to recognize coverages 

4.	
To get our personnel in better position to execute their given assignment

5.	
To create problems for the defense in man under coverages when attempting to hold or bump receivers at the line of scrimmage

6.	
To create an opportunity for indecision, confusion, and/or mis-alignment by the secondary

7.	
To cause movement on the part of the defense in an effort to realign its personnel with the coverage calls and changes and not allow them to set themselves and react to familiar offensive patterns, make the defense play “on the move”

8.	
To force opponents to spend practice time and effort on adjusting to movement patterns rather than improving defensive skills and schemes

9.	
To create a visual complexity to the defense yet be able to run the same basic plays from a variety of looks

It’s specifically important to deliniate Coryell’s reasons for using pre-snap motion as much as he did because when you look through these nine points you see a lot of the NFL’s current passing philosophy in there, and before Coryell perfected his structure, that wasn’t the case to this degree. Coryell’s motions could come in all kinds of forms—halfbacks flexing out wide from the backfield, wide-side receivers moving inside slot receivers in moveable twins looks, and the Roving Y moving all over the place. Anticipation was also a big part of the Coryell passing game. He wanted his receivers to break to the ball as it was thrown and beat the defender to the ball. Coryell also trusted his receivers with leverage reads. They adjusted their breaks based on how the coverage was leaning. From the pre-snap phase to the end of the route, the idea was to have the defense on its heels no matter what it did. 

The Roving Y Move Tight End

Don Coryell did move his tight ends out wide from time to time at San Diego State, and J.V. Cain played the role of the hybrid receiver/tight end with the St. Louis Cardinals, but it was really Kellen Winslow who redefined the position with his own special physical abilities and mental acumen, which perfectly complemented Coryell’s expansive philosophy. The San Diego Chargers selected Winslow out of Missouri with the 13
th
 overall pick in the 1979 draft, and after a rookie season in which he was limited with a leg injury and caught just 25 passes in seven games, he came back with a flourish the next two years, leading the NFL with 89 catches in 1980 and 88 in 1981. Winslow was the perfect prototype of the modern tight end—he was big enough to overwhelm cornerbacks and safeties, beating even aggressive double coverage easily with his physicality, and quick enough to make life nightmarish for the linebackers of the day. Moreover, he bought in completely to Coryell’s system and became an outstanding route runner and catalyst for the entire offense. There were other tight ends of the era who had the ability to do what Winslow did—like Ozzie Newsome of the Cleveland Browns and Todd Christensen of the Oakland Raiders—but Winslow was the one in the right place at the right time.

It didn’t hurt that Coryell had some great assistants early on with the Chargers. Joe Gibbs played tight end for Coryell at San Diego State and he later coached the offensive line at San Diego State from 1964 to 1966 and the Cardinals running backs from 1973 to 1977. He was the offensive coordinator with the Chargers in 1979 and 1980 before moving on to a long career as Washington Redskins head coach, in which he won three Super Bowls with three different quarterbacks. But with the Chargers, it was Gibbs, the former tight end, who consulted with Coryell, receivers coach Ernie Zampese, and offensive line coach Jim Hanifan to find the best ways in which to get Winslow more involved. 

The solution? Flex him out more often from the formation and make him a moving target on every down. He wasn’t a messenger tight end available in a situational role but the crux of a receiver corps that had Charlie Joiner, John Jefferson, Wes Chandler, Chuck Muncie, and James Brooks. When it all was working, it was too much for any defense to stop, and Winslow was the integral figure. He was a force multiplier in San Diego’s pre-snap packages. Wherever he went, the defense was going to guess wrong and wind up in a bad spot. If you’re an outside left cornerback and you’re expecting pre-snap to cover the Z receiver on a go route, and all of a sudden, here comes Winslow outside the Z receiver in motion from the left side of the formation to run an 18-yard skinny post, what are you supposed to do? Winslow, more than anyone in Coryell’s offenses, made the math difficult for anyone facing him. And in doing so, he inspired generations of coaches after him to work those schematic advantages. “During the early years of Air Coryell, the strong safety wasn’t much more than a glorified linebacker,” former Denver Broncos defensive coordinator Joe Collier said in 
The Games That Changed the Game
. “Basically, a run defender who could cover an average tight end. You put a guy like Winslow in the slot, and he’s going up against coverage that’s a lot slower than he is. It’s not the matchup on defense we liked. So, we’d try to give that strong safety some help like bringing a linebacker out to him or bringing the other safety over to help.”

Of course, when you put that much attention on Winslow, someone else was going to win their inevitable one-on-one matchup, and that’s one reason it seemed that on every passing play at least one Chargers receiver was open throughout the down. Winslow ended his career with 541 catches for 6,741 yards and 45 touchdowns and was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1995. The game he’s best remembered for is the 41–38 Chargers win against the Miami Dolphins in the 1981 divisional playoff round. Winslow caught 13 passes for 166 yards and a touchdown and was pawed at by Miami’s defense throughout the game to the point where he had to be helped off the field by teammates after the game due to injury, cramps, and dehydration. It was an epic performance, though several bitter former Dolphins swear to this day that Winslow was engaging in a bit of method acting. Still, his place in NFL history is unique and eternal—Winslow was the player who truly made it acceptable for tight ends to be the primary targets in NFL passing offenses on a week-to-week basis. 

As much of an innovator as he was, Coryell passed away on July 1, 2010, without seeing his own induction in the Pro Football Hall of Fame—a monumentally silly snub that continues to this day. Coryell’s teams were never able to reach a Super Bowl. His distant relationship with his own defenses was a serious cause, and the Chargers were never able to mount a serious defensive threat after defensive end Fred Dean was traded to the San Francisco 49ers in a fit of cheapness from team owner Gene Klein. Dean went on to a different level of greatness and eventually the Hall of Fame under Bill Walsh, and a defense that was once as stout as its offense quickly fell apart. You can point to Coryell’s own shortcomings when looking at his 3–6 postseason record, and there’s merit to that, but there’s also truth to the idea that if Coryell had ever worked with an owner as concerned with the product on the field as he was with the checkbook, things would have been different. He retired after the 1986 season and moved back to the state of Washington and his cabin in the island woods. 

And in that retirement, he saw his influence bloom. Coryell’s place as an all-time NFL innovator is secure not only because his concepts worked so well when he was coaching, but also because the coaches of today will tell you that those same concepts are a major part of their own playbooks. More specifically, if you were to superimpose the most expansive versions of the passing game Coryell unleashed in San Diego over the most challenging passing offenses of the modern age, it would be a fairly easy fit. “We’ve lost a man who has contributed to the game of pro football in a very lasting way with his innovations and with his style,” Dan Fouts said upon his old coach’s passing. “They say that imitation is the highest form of flattery. Look around; it’s there.”

His other proteges agree. “If Don Coryell walked in and looked at our call sheet, he’d recognize about half the plays,” then-Redskins head coach Norv Turner told 
The Sporting News
 in 1999. “It’s not about plays; it’s about personnel, execution, getting people to believe and doing it right.” Mike Martz, who took the three-digit system to the St. Louis Rams and the “Greatest Show on Turf” Rams, perhaps said it best. “Don is the father of the modern passing game. People talk about the West Coast Offense, but Don started the West Coast decades ago and kept updating it,” he told the Voice of San Diego. “You look around the NFL now, and so many teams are running a version of the Coryell offense. Coaches have added their own touches, but it’s still Coryell’s offense. He has disciples all over the league. He changed the game.” And as the NFL moved into the 1980s, his concepts would spread far and wide—to the next generation of champions.

