# Section 10

---



6. Hogs and Geniuses: The NFL in the 1980s

“Greed, for lack of a better word, is good. Greed is right. Greed works. Greed clarifies, cuts through, and captures the essence of the evolutionary spirit. Greed—in all of its forms—greed for life, for money, for love, knowledge, has marked the upward surge of mankind.” 

—Michael Douglas as Gordon Gekko in 
Wall Street

The 
1980s were a decade of excess in many ways, and the NFL followed suit with the flashiest, most complex versions of the pro game anyone had ever seen. Many innovators defined the era, but one stood above all the rest, and he came as close to the perfect version of offensive football as could be imagined. The rest of the league would be forced to respond to the trail that Bill Walsh had finally been allowed to blaze.

Bill Walsh: The Genius

Bill Walsh was informed to a great extent by perhaps the NFL’s two greatest offensive geniuses before him and he took the things he learned from Sid Gillman and Paul Brown to a new level, building what eventually became known as the West Coast Offense while putting his stamp on the game forever. 

Walsh started his professional coaching career as the Oakland Raiders’ running backs coach in 1966, and Raiders main man Al Davis was a Gillman acolyte. Davis worked under Gillman as an assistant with the San Diego Chargers from 1960 through 1962. It was under Davis’ auspices that Walsh started to see his own versions of the brilliance of Gillman’s geometry. The timing of the passing plays and the mathematical precision of passing concepts came to Walsh’s mind from Gillman’s work in the American Football League. Gillman was fond of saying that a football field is 53 
⅓
 yards wide and 100 yards long and he was going to force defenses to cover the entire width and length of it. 

Gillman did so with innovative vertical concepts, but he also did so with geometry. In the early 1960s, Gillman spoke with assistant Tom Bass about the triangular nature of the ideal combination of the quarterback’s passing and the receiver’s route running. If the angles were correct, Gillman hypothesized that the quarterback and receiver could be timed up before the snap of the ball even happened. 

Bass met with a mathematics professor from San Diego State in 1964, and the two men deduced that the perfect combination of quarterback, receiver, and route was indeed triangular in nature. In its basic form, the triangle consisted of: the route the receiver ran until he cut to a different angle, the remainder of the route run after the break, and the movement of the ball from quarterback to receiver. No matter the route, Gillman saw consistency in the geometry. “It was a fully dimensional approach, utilizing the backs and tight ends more extensively than other offenses,” Walsh said years later in 
The Genius
. “A typical NFL team might have three or four pass patterns for the halfback, but the Raiders’ system had as many as 20, and even they didn’t use anything close to Gillman’s whole playbook. To develop an understanding of it took time, but once learned, it was invaluable.”

Brown hired Walsh to be an offensive assistant on Gillman’s recommendation before the 1968 season for the expansion Cincinnati Bengals, and it wasn’t long before Walsh’s quick mind—and the things he had learned on the way up—gave Brown the confidence to hand his passing game over. Walsh moved from the position of wide receivers coach to offensive coordinator in 1971. While assistant coach Bill “Tiger” Johnson handled the running game, Walsh called all of Cincinnati’s passing plays from the coach’s box. Because Brown wanted to maintain the illusion of control, it was a laborious process. Walsh radioed the call down to Johnson’s headset, Johnson told Brown the call, and Brown relayed the play to a messenger guard—a player going in for that play who would give the call to the quarterback. 

In return, Walsh received a comprehensive education—everything from play-calling to game management to player personnel to dealing with the media—from the man who had formed a large percentage of the league’s 
modus operandi.
 

Complications arose when Walsh started to get too much credit for the design of Cincinnati’s offense, but years before that, there was a far more vexing issue on the field when quarterback Greg Cook suffered a severe injury in 1969. Selected in the first round of the 1969 AFL Draft, Cook was, according to Walsh’s account in an NFL.com story, “the greatest talent ever to play the position—like Steve Young, but bigger,” and the Bengals’ original plan was to use Cook’s arm and mobility to develop a complex vertical passing game.

It didn’t take long for things to unravel dramatically. Cook was tackled on his throwing shoulder in the third game of his NFL career by Kansas City Chiefs linebacker Jim Lynch and tore his rotator cuff in the process. With the knowledge that Cook would be out for the 1970 season, Walsh and Brown had to make do with Virgil Carter, who had completed a total of 91 passes in two seasons with the Chicago Bears before the Bengals acquired him. Carter was a journeyman at best but an important footnote to football history in that his limitations forced Walsh to create entirely new concepts for his team.

Carter’s first NFL start came in Week 4 of the 1970 season, as Brown returned to Cleveland for the first time since his firing in January of 1963. Brown and Walsh used Carter’s mobility to roll him out of the pocket frequently, and Carter’s relatively weak arm didn’t matter because Walsh had designed an offense that relied on timing patterns that Carter could easily complete. He completed 20-of-28 passes for 218 yards, one touchdown, and one interception in that first start. Cincinnati lost the game, but the die had been cast for this new offense. The 1970 Bengals won the new AFC Central division with Carter completing 51.4 percent of his passes—a solid number for the era. One season later, Carter led the NFL with a 62.2 percent completion rate. Carter was eventually usurped by Ken Anderson, who was taken in the third round of the 1971 draft and would become Cincinnati’s primary quarterback from 1972 through 1984. “It was high-percentage throwing,” then-Bengals backup quarterback and eventual Walsh assistant coach Sam Wyche told the NFL Network. “Lay the ball off short and let the receiver make the total yardage with the run after the catch.”

That was the basic beginning of an offensive philosophy which would become far, far more complex in time. Walsh’s innovations during his time in Cincinnati were voluminous, and sometimes came from random chance. In his autobiography, 
Building a Champion,
 he described how he started to use the tight end in motion from one side of the formation to the other. “We used the tight end in motion first by mistake,” he said. “Cincinnati was playing the Raiders in Oakland. In the third quarter, Bob Trumpy lined up on the wrong side by mistake. He had to shift over quickly to the other side, and all hell broke loose. At that time, the Raiders had very specialized [defenders]. They had a weak-side linebacker, they had a strong-side linebacker, they had a defensive end who only played on the tight-end side, and they would shift their two inside linebackers. They all ran into each other in the middle of the field, trying to adjust.” 

After the game Johnson suggested that the Bengals put motion in the playbook on purpose. Walsh said that they looked at each other and doubled over laughing, but that’s how motion became a seminal part of the Walsh offense. And the motion concept was nightmarish for the more static defenses of the time. Against defenses with specific linebacker designations (weak-side and strong-side), Walsh could direct his tight end to create unfavorable matchups. “If a weak-side linebacker was fast but had trouble handling a big, blocking tight end, we could force him to defend on the strong-side anytime we wanted simply by moving the tight end to his side,” Walsh said.

From there, Walsh started to split Trumpy outside of the formation, forcing those linebackers to stray from their preferred places and opening up other alternatives. By the time he was hired in San Francisco, Walsh was using receivers and backs in motion. Everything was about getting the defense off-balance before the snap even happened. Walsh saw the defense as a moveable canvas onto which he would paint exacting structural concepts, and motion was a major part of this. Walsh also discovered that by putting different players in motion, a quarterback could discern whether the defense was playing man or zone. “If a back goes in motion and the linebackers begin to loosen, the quarterback can expect a zone,” he said. “If a linebacker immediately moves with the back in motion, the quarterback can see man-to-man coverage.”

This worked at a basic level because defenses were relatively rudimentary in the 1970s, and the substitutions and hybrid positions of the current era were rarely seen. Teams use motion to discern coverage concepts to this day, though disguised and split coverage concepts are the norm in the modern age. Back then? Teams didn’t know how to adapt.

But the most important aspects of the West Coast Offense were timing and placement. “The basis of our passing game remained the same: timed passes and precise patterns, which we practiced extensively,” Walsh wrote. “Each year I was with the Bengals, we isolated the skills we needed and the timing that was necessary until we were very proficient in all phases of offense. Whether the passes were deep downfield or five-yarders designed to control the ball, it was a system that early on made the most of limited personnel and, when we acquired talented men at the skill positions, made full use of their potential.”

Walsh’s own potential as a head coach was severely affected by the surprise announcement before the 1976 season that Brown was retiring as the Bengals’ head coach and would choose Johnson to be his replacement. It was a crushing blow for Walsh, who believed he deserved and had been promised the position. Brown responded by telling Walsh that he was expected to continue as the team’s offensive coordinator. Walsh insisted that he would leave the team as soon as his contract was up, which just happened to be a week after their meeting. 

Walsh had already cut a deal with head coach Tommy Prothro of the Chargers to be Prothro’s offensive coordinator. Brown responded with disdain and allegedly a campaign to blacklist Walsh throughout the league as a head coaching candidate. Walsh spent one year in San Diego, observed that no NFL team was willing to close the deal at that point, and headed to Stanford for a head coaching position that lasted through the 1978 season.

The 49ers broke the NFL logjam in 1979, and the team Walsh inherited was an absolute mess in a personnel sense. With their 2–14 record in 1978, the 49ers would have had the first overall pick in the 1979 draft except that former general manager Joe Thomas had traded that pick to the Buffalo Bills for the broken-down version of O.J. Simpson. The new 49ers would have to make do with very little at the start of Walsh’s tenure, and it showed on the field. His team went 2–14 again in 1979 and raised the profile up to 6–10 in 1980. Walsh later referred to the 1981 Super Bowl season, in which the 49ers finished the regular season with a 13–3 record, as “Camelot.” He may have regarded that team so highly because from a pure talent perspective it was the one that required the most—and best—coaching. In any regard 1981 was the year it all came together for coach and team, as Walsh’s offensive mind-set really took hold.

Walsh’s belief was that the passing game could hold the key to efficient possession, and he advanced that concept in an era when the running game was thought to be the key to drive consistency, while the forward pass brought about the explosive play in less frequent bursts. In Super Bowl VIII at the end of the 1973 season, the Miami Dolphins beat the Minnesota Vikings, and Miami quarterback Bob Griese completed seven passes in eight attempts for 73 yards. He didn’t have to do any more than that because Miami’s rushing attack and defense were so formidable. At the end of the next season, the Pittsburgh Steelers beat the Vikings in Super Bowl IX with Steelers quarterback Terry Bradshaw completing 9-of-14 passes for 96 yards. Again, more wasn’t required; Bradshaw was buttressed by a fantastic running game and perhaps the best defense the NFL has ever seen.

In that era completion percentage was an afterthought to many because the passing game wasn’t as dimensional. In 1979, Walsh’s first year as an NFL head coach, the league’s completion rate was 54.1 percent. A decade later, in Walsh’s last season in 1988, the league’s completion percentage was 54.3. More was expected of Walsh’s quarterbacks and the quarterbacks in the system he created. Anderson, Carter’s replacement in Cincinnati, led the league in completion percentage in 1974, 1981, and 1982. Joe Montana led the NFL in completion percentage four different times from 1980 through 1987 and had a completion rate under 60 just once in his career as a starter—in 1989 when he “regressed” to a 59.9 rate. 

Yes, Walsh helped his quarterbacks in this regard by designing short passes, but Anderson led the league in yards per attempts twice under Walsh’s tutelage (1974 and 1975), and Montana did the same in 1989. Timing was a big part of his offense. So was geometry. Flooding coverage areas with more receivers than a defense could handle was a major functional construct. But the primary invention that Walsh brought to the NFL was a passing game that was so complex and artistic, and so exacting in its methodology, that it was beautiful in a symphonic sense and impossible to stop in a physical sense—all at the same time. “You think about Michelangelo and all the phenomenal things that he did,” 49ers CEO/president Carmen Policy said while describing Walsh to NFL Films. “And you almost have the sense there might have been some divine intervention there.”

Whether it was with help from up above or not, Walsh was at least three steps ahead of his contemporaries. “I remember a time on the practice field. Joe had completed a ball to Jerry Rice,” Mike Holmgren, who was Walsh’s quarterbacks coach and offensive assistant from 1986 through 1988, told NFL Films. “Beautiful pass, 30 yards downfield. And Jerry just had to move slightly to catch the ball at full stride. And I said, ‘Nice play. Good throw.’ Bill was closer to me and he said, ‘Mike, that’s not good enough. I want the ball delivered one foot in front of the numbers. I don’t want it over here; I want it right 
here
.’”

Getting it right 
here
 was the whole point. Walsh didn’t want to hear about how this player or that player could have beaten his man deep. He was not impressed with feats of strength or speed. “As Paul Brown would say, we’re a precision machine,” Walsh said in 
A Football Life:
 
Paul Brown
. “We’re the San Francisco 49ers, and that was sort of our label—a precision machine, a machine that effectively and precisely destroyed the opponent. Our system of football sustained itself, and we refined it further and further each year until at some point it might have even been an art form.”

Walsh knew that physical attributes without a command of the entire structure transformed into useless energy and he set the path accordingly. He was tough and exacting on his players, but the reward for his players was clear: they would be more productive in this system than in any other.

And that’s where Montana came in. There was some truth to the notion that Walsh could succeed with any functional quarterback, but it was clear that when Montana got up to speed with the West Coast Offense, he took it to an entirely new level with a specific skillset that seemed divinely tailored to Walsh’s preferences. Montana didn’t have a cannon arm, but he understood the importance of functional velocity. He knew how and when to take a bit off the throw—and when to turn on the jets. He was incredibly mobile in and out of the pocket, which allowed him to take full advantage of Walsh’s option route concepts and highly-developed route systems. Plays could be developed for longer periods of time because Montana would keep the play alive. And together, Walsh and Montana became legends. 

The plays and concepts also became legend. There was the 
Brown Right Sprint Right Option
 play that became “The Catch.” There were an array of option routes, in which Walsh’s players could re-determine their passages through a defense based on that defense’s structure. There was the slant, which Montana really perfected with Rice. Montana once told Rice that the receiver added five years to the quarterback’s career because he could take a five-yard slant to the house. Walsh would flood one side of a defense with multiple receivers. He would send a barrage of targets through short and intermediate areas with precise concepts and nearly inevitable results. “It was easy to believe Bill Walsh because he would say things that would happen: ‘We’re going to run this play against this defense,’” Dwight Clark said in the 1981 episode of 
America’s Game
. “‘When you catch it, there won’t be anybody within 10 yards of you.’ You’d catch the ball and turn around and get ready to get hit, and there’s nobody there. He would do those kinds of things over and over, and it was his designing of plays. You got to the point where everything he said, you just believed. Sometimes football players have that stigma of the dumb jock. But in Bill’s offense, you couldn’t be the dumb jock. All I knew was that a 10-yard hook [route] was: run 10 yards and hook. In the West Coast Offense, a 10-yard hook could be a cross versus man-to-man. Against inside coverage, it’s sliding back outside. If it’s man-to-man under, you’re looping out and around. To me, that’s what made the West Coast Offense really difficult.”

For Ronnie Lott and the rest of San Francisco’s defense, trying to counter all this stuff made them better—especially against the teams that weren’t presenting such complicated offenses. And in the early 1980s, that included every other team in the NFL. “The ability to change routes, to change the depth of your route given the fact that a defense is running a certain [coverage]…Believe me, it’s not fair,” Lott told NFL Films. “There were times that George Seifert and I would look at some of these plays and go, ‘Man, that’s gonna be hard to stop.’”

From a purely schematic standpoint, Walsh really planted his flag in the 1981 postseason, when he utilized multiple concepts—several of them relatively unseen in the NFL—to ensure that the 49ers won their first Super Bowl title. In three games Walsh took his keys to the kingdom and set the path for the NFL’s modern offensive structure. The strategic troika began against the New York Giants, whose rookie pass-rushing linebacker Lawrence Taylor was single-handedly altering the ways in which offenses deployed their skill position players. 

1981 NFC Divisional Playoff: San Francisco 49ers 38, New York Giants 24

In 1981 Washington Redskins head coach Joe Gibbs had altered his vertical passing game to include an “H-back”—a tight end aligned behind and just outside the tackle—to help deal with Lawrence Taylor’s furious pass rushing abilities. And in the week before the New York Giants traveled to Candlestick Park to meet the San Francisco 49ers, Taylor had absolutely demolished Philadelphia Eagles left tackle Stan Walters in New York’s 27–21 win. Selected second overall in the 1981 draft, Taylor cut a wide swath through the NFL in his rookie season, which was the last in which the league did not keep official sack totals. But there was no question about the transcendent effect on every offense he faced. 

The 49ers’ strategy against Taylor was important enough to be documented in several books, including 
The Games That Changed the Game
 by Ron Jaworski and Greg Cosell and 
The Blind Side
 by Michael Lewis. Walsh wanted to throw the ball on a high percentage of plays, which left out the option of reducing his number of receivers, leaving extra players in to block. His left tackle, Dan Audick, was 6
’
3
”
 and 250 pounds and wasn’t physically up to the challenge Taylor presented—certainly not on a play-after-play, one-on-one basis. Walsh knew that if a two-time Pro Bowler like Walters wasn’t up to the task, his guy wouldn’t be either.

After a lot of frustrated film study, Bill Walsh threw out the standard paradigm and directed his left guard John Ayers—a 6
’
5
”
, 258-pound strongman—to face up to Taylor with a “molly block.” Taylor telegraphed when he was coming after the quarterback by swinging his arms before the snap, and Ayers moved out to the perimeter of the pocket to block Taylor when he read a pass rush. The reason for this was simple—Taylor had a combination of strength and speed off the snap that made it nearly impossible for tackles to get in their stances and address him with optimal momentum. So, it was up to Ayers to pull from his guard spot and seal Taylor to the edge. 

The San Francisco 49ers’ crossing route during the 1981 NFC Divisional Playoff Game

The molly block wasn’t the only strategy the 49ers used against Taylor. They loaded up their formations to his side and then forced him to cover with specific route concepts. In fact the 49ers employed the molly block on both sides of the line, as right guard Randy Cross used an identical pull block to handle left outside linebacker Byron Hunt. This left tackles Ayers and Keith Fahnhorst to deal with ends George Martin and Gary Jeter one-on-one with quick, decisive blocks. Taylor was effectively negated for the most part; Joe Montana completed 20-of-31 passes, including 17 in the 49ers’ first 21 plays; and Walsh’s team had passed its first postseason test.

Then-New York defensive coordinator Bill Parcells later said that the Giants’ main mistake was that they didn’t blitz their inside linebackers when San Francisco’s guards pulled out as they did, but the tape shows Walsh’s ability to prepare for every possible challenge, including that one. 

On a 14-yard pass to tight end Charle Young with 11:46 left in the first half, halfback Ricky Patton blocked left inside linebacker Harry Carson (53), a future Hall of Famer, and it was that block that allowed Montana the time to get the ball out to Young on a crossing route. This play typified Walsh’s undersold understanding that power was a key part of his offense. In the NFC Championship Game, the Dallas Cowboys would get a different taste of that on a famous drive.

1981 NFC Championship Game: San Francisco 49ers 28, Dallas Cowboys 27

The San Francisco 49ers and Dallas Cowboys had a very contentious relationship that preceded Bill Walsh’s involvement by almost a decade. San Francisco had been eliminated from the playoffs every year from 1970 through 1972 by Dallas, and a 59–14 loss to the Cowboys in 1980 left a bad taste in Walsh’s mouth. The 49ers head coach made sure his players knew how he felt about their upcoming opponents running up the score and calling the 1981 team a “fluke.” “This goddamn Dallas team,” Walsh said during one team meeting that week. “They can’t keep their mouths shut. They’re doing the same thing again this week. They say, ‘This time, the 49ers will be meeting the real Cowboys.’ Their press releases are all about how they’re going to kick ass…they’re so arrogant…Well, I’m fed up with this bullshit…we’re going to knock them all over the field.”

It didn’t quite happen like that. The Cowboys may have been arrogant, but they were also very, very good. The difference in this game was Walsh’s ability to discern that his opponent’s weakness was not about personnel. It was about a lack of schematic diversity, and he was ready to exploit that for all it was worth. 

The Cowboys had an amazing defensive front in Harvey Martin, Randy White, Jethro Pugh, and Ed “Too Tall” Jones, but Walsh felt that he could use Dallas head coach and defensive mastermind Tom Landry’s predictability against him. Dallas’ defensive coverage was staid, according to Walsh, and he would therefore play against type to gain the advantage. Led by cornerback Everson Walls, Dallas’ secondary played heavy man-to-man coverage. Walsh used tight end placement and men in motion to dictate which defender would cover which receiver. “In effect, we would force them to defend with their automatic adjustments rather than to defend with their basic defenses,” Walsh said.

This played into the Walsh truism that you always wanted to beat your opponent to the punch, to force him to react from his heels. It didn’t always proceed as planned in this game—Joe Montana threw three interceptions and was sacked three times—but on the drive that led up to “The Catch,” it worked about as well as Walsh could have possibly imagined. 

Danny White’s punt and Freddie Solomon’s fair catch put the ball on the San Francisco 11-yard line with 4:54 left in the game and the 49ers down 27–21. Because the Cowboys anticipated that Walsh would call passes as long as his team had the ball, they went with a base nickel defense as a result. “Most teams would play a very predictable offense against that defense in this situation,” Walsh said. “They would substitute one or two wide receivers and start throwing. The quarterback would be expected to hold the ball until pass patterns developed down the field. The Cowboys would totally disrupt these tactics with their great pass rush, using only an occasional blitz.”

The San Francisco 49ers’ sweep during the 1981 NFC Championship Game

Instead, the 49ers went with sweeps and draws, using John Ayers (68) and Randy Cross (51) to move in space and create openings against a Cowboys line that was charging after Montana. Because Dallas’ secondary was focused on coverage and the nickel base defense took a linebacker off the field, that was the sound strategy. 

At times Dallas switched to a dime defense, leaving just one linebacker in with six defensive backs on the field. Walsh and offensive line coach Bobb McKittrick reminded each other during that last drive to run the 
18–BOB
 and 
19–BOB
 sweeps, in which Ayers and Cross would seal the edges upfield and allow running back Lenvil Elliott to make serious gains on the ground.

Cowboys safety Charlie Waters was pleading with his teammates to key against the run, but as Waters himself said, “We had to keep them to the minimum.” Doing so required Dallas to keep the pressure on Montana at the expense of the run defense or at least that’s what the Cowboys hypothesized. At this point Walsh was playing chess to Landry’s checkers. 

“The Catch” in the 1981 NFC Championship Game

Of the drive’s first seven plays, four were draws or sweeps to running back Elliott. Then, Walsh called a reverse to Solomon, a play that gained 14 yards from the Dallas 49-yard line to the Dallas 35 as the Cowboys defenders fell for the misdirection because of their aggressive pursuit of the ball. After that Montana threw a sideline pass, a perfect strike, to Dwight Clark at the Dallas 25-yard line that went through two Cowboys defenders. 

Sprint Right Option
 was Walsh’s most famous play structure because it worked so well in such an iconic game, but Clark explained that it was also a perfect example of Walsh’s precise vision. The coach had pre-planned every part of the play, including the point at which Montana would throw the ball away if things didn’t turn out right. 

And in this case, it didn’t. The play didn’t go as diagrammed; Solomon was supposed to clear his man away with a route to the sideline, but he couldn’t shake the coverage underneath. The 49ers anticipated that “Too Tall” Jones would rush Montana, but Jones instead waited to see what Montana would do and was one of the many defenders chasing after the quarterback. However, Clark followed Montana as he rolled right—an important part of the option route concept with a mobile quarterback—and Montana threw the ball where only Clark could catch it, which was as high up in the air as Clark could possibly jump. Walsh had specifically told Montana before this play that if he didn’t see what he liked, he should simply throw the ball away. The 49ers had one more down if this third-down pass didn’t work…but of course, it worked, and San Francisco was on the way to the Super Bowl. 

Super Bowl XVI: San Francisco 49ers 26, Cincinnati Bengals 21

“Brother, did 49ers coach Bill Walsh throw some stuff at the Bengals,” Paul Zimmerman wrote in his 
Sports Illustrated
 account of the game. “The triple pass, in which Montana hands to Patton, who hands to Solomon, who pitches back to Montana, who throws downfield to tight end Charle Young, was designed for third and 1. It made its entry on the Niners’ first third and 1 situation of the game—in the middle of their long [68 yards], exotic touchdown drive in the first quarter—picked up a neat 14 yards, and then bowed out for the day amid polite applause.”

Zimmerman also detailed the plays Walsh had in his quiver that he didn’t use—an end-around pass in which Dwight Clark throws to receiver Freddie Solomon, Solomon throwing a pass off a reverse, option passes for every one of his running backs, a safety blitz out of the nickel defense. It was a dizzying array of stuff—both seen and unseen—and even the legendary Paul Brown couldn’t keep up. 

The San Francisco 49ers’ triple pass in Super Bowl XVI

The flashiest play Walsh called was the triple pass in the 49ers’ first drive. Joe Montana took the ball from center and handed it to Solomon, who swept in from right to left as if running a reverse. Instead, Solomon handed the ball to running back Ricky Patton, who handed the ball back to Montana. Then, with Montana rolling right and the left side of the Cincinnati Bengals defense in disarray, Montana hit Young on a 14-yard pass for a first down. 

This was a specific burn strategy. “That was an old Paul Brown play,” Walsh said. “Paul in the press box had to watch his old triple pass used successfully against him in the Super Bowl. At that point I remembered his constant admonition to use your own trick plays first. I had done it, but in this instance, Paul probably didn’t appreciate it.”

Brown Right Slot—Fox 2 FB Cross 
in Super Bowl XVI

Not when his most able lieutenant was now his most gifted opponent. Walsh threw all kinds of things at the Bengals on the way to a 20–0 halftime lead. He added an unbalanced line, in which left tackle John Ayers lined up between Randy Cross and Keith Fahnhorst on the right side. The Bengals didn’t see that coming, and it provided the power required for Walsh’s running game. The 49ers outran Cincinnati 127 yards to 72 and 40 rushing plays to 24. 

San Francisco’s second touchdown—at the end of a 92-yard drive—featured another important wrinkle, a variation of the flood concept. Called 
Brown Right Slot
—
Fox 2 FB Cross
, the play had fullback Earl Cooper faking a dive play into the Cincinnati line but then running a route into the left-side seam. Meanwhile, receivers Solomon and Mike Shumann were busy taking the right side of the Bengals’ coverage—one linebacker, one cornerback, and one safety—into the end zone. Flooding Cooper into the underside of Cincinnati’s zone coverage after Solomon and Shumann ran their clear-out routes meant that Cooper was wide open. In addition, Young ran a quick up route after a quick block of the left outside linebacker, and halfback Patton ran out for a screen. This froze the left side of Cincinnati’s coverage, and it was a prime example of Walsh’s ability to use the full field in a horizontal sense—just as Sid Gillman used it as a vertical canvas. 

In the regular-season opener against the Detroit Lions, Walsh also noticed that the artificial turf at the Pontiac Silverdome reacted oddly to the kicks that scooted along the ground, which occurred because injured kicker Ray Wersching could not boot the ball to his full power. In the Super Bowl, which also took place at the Silverdome, he directed Wersching to boot squib kicks along that turf to make the bounces more unpredictable for Cincinnati’s return men. The Bengals fumbled near the end of the first half due to this strategy, and San Francisco recovered. As NFL Films’ John Facenda said, Walsh “turned accident into design.” 

The 49ers weren’t out of the woods yet, though. The Bengals fought back like the great team they were, going to a very Walsh-like short passing game and ramping up their defensive efforts. But it was San Francisco’s defense that decided the contest, and Cincinnati cooperated by forgetting a key credo of the Walsh philosophy: receivers must run their routes exactly and precisely, and there’s a reason for every inch of every route.

The Bengals started a drive at the 50-yard line with 6:52 left in the third quarter and managed to establish third and goal from the 49ers’ 3-yard line after a successful fourth-down conversion by fullback Pete Johnson, who then ran for two yards and no yards on the next two plays. On that third and goal, Ken Anderson threw a quick flare to running back Charles Alexander. Linebacker Dan Bunz stopped Alexander a foot short of the goal line, which he was able to do because Alexander cleared his route a yard short of the goal line. Johnson was stopped on fourth and goal by the entire middle of the San Francisco defensive line. Bunz, linebacker Jack “Hacksaw” Reynolds, and defensive back Ronnie Lott served as the primary stoppers. That goal-line stand—perhaps the most famous in Super Bowl history—proved to be the difference. No matter how ferociously Cincinnati tried to recover from their early deficit, it was Walsh who would prove to have the edge. The Bengals could not match Walsh’s exactitude, and it cost them dearly. 

Walsh’s seat-of-the-pants adaptations were not only impressive but necessary. He believed—and remarked several times in the years to come—that his 1981 team didn’t quite have the sheer talent to do what it did. “We really did win with ‘mirrors’ as we were accused of doing all season,” Walsh said in 
Finding the Winning Edge
. “Physically, the Bengals were bigger and stronger and they ultimately outgained us by a good margin, 356 yards to 275. While preparing for the game, I racked my brain for anything that might work—passes off reverses, anything. Not desperation plays. They were things we had touched on throughout the year. But they were also plays we wouldn’t have resorted to in a typical NFL game.”

Early on, Walsh’s success was seen as gimmicky and fluky in a larger sense. After the divisional win against the New York Giants, various members of that organization intimated that the 49ers would have had a much harder time dealing with Lawrence Taylor if the field at Candlestick Park wasn’t slow, wet, and mulchy. After the NFC championship win against Dallas, some Cowboys players said flat-out that the superior team had lost, which they had said before—much to Walsh’s consternation. And it took a while for Walsh’s atypical philosophies to grab the NFL by the scruff of the neck in a perception sense. The “Finesse-Ass 49ers,” as San Francisco linebacker Keena Turner referred to his own team in a sarcastic manner after one key win, were seen as a nickel-and-dime football team unable to maintain the power and intimidation edges common to the game at that time.

It was a canard, and Walsh was able to combine brains and brawn in ways nobody else had ever imagined. In the end it happened as much because Walsh, the personnel man, had a ridiculous eye for talent and stocked his rosters thusly. Montana improved to the point where he became the ultimate agent of distillation of Walsh’s genius. He would eventually be replaced by Steve Young, the best left-handed quarterback in NFL history and a fellow Hall of Famer. Roger Craig, selected in the second round of the 1983 draft out of Nebraska, became the first back to gain more than 1,000 yards rushing and 1,000 yards receiving in the same season. Jerry Rice, taken in the first round of the 1985 draft out of tiny Mississippi Valley State, was seen on TV by Walsh in a hotel room while on a scouting trip and would eventually become the greatest receiver in the history of the NFL by an absolutely crushing margin. John Taylor, Rice’s second banana in the later years of the Walsh era, would have been a No. 1 receiver on most teams. 

And as his teams improved, Walsh really unleashed the far edges of his offensive philosophy. Eventually, he was able to create and implement a system that virtually guaranteed success if his players followed his schemes to the letter. The 1984 team came as close to perfection as any he ever coached, beating the Miami Dolphins in Super Bowl XIX and finishing the season with an 18–1 record that might have ended in a perfect season were it not for a controversial pass interference call in a 20–17 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers. The 1988 49ers rebounded from a midseason slump to beat the Bengals once again in the Super Bowl in what turned out to be Walsh’s last game as an NFL head coach. He went out swinging with Montana engineering a 92-yard, game-winning drive in the closing minutes. And the team he left George Seifert routed the Denver Broncos for another Super Bowl title at the end of the 1989 season. 

But no amount of success would satisfy him. “I hate to see bad football,” Walsh wrote in his book, 
The Score Takes Care of Itself
. “I hate to see a team play bad football, even on a single play—in practice, in a game, anywhere. Bad football makes me ill in the same way, I suppose, a symphony conductor hates to hear an orchestra mangle Bach or Beethoven. There’s a reverence for the art. For me, it could be described as a reverence for football the way it could be played, the exquisite beauty of what can occur at its uppermost level. I think top performers in all professions have that same deep respect—even reverence—for their work.”

When Walsh compared himself to any other great artist, he wasn’t throwing an ego parade—or at least that wasn’t the entire function of the message. Walsh implicitly understood the balance between the understanding of human frailties and the deep desire for perfection, as much as that inevitable divide tortured him. He forever regretted leaving the 49ers after the 1988 season. And after all the battles with team owner Eddie DeBartolo, after all the postseason defeats that seemed to crush his soul more than was true for other coaches, and after all the admissions that perfection would never be attained, Walsh eventually had to make an uneasy peace with his own NFL coaching career. But he was also able to look back at a career in which he contributed as much to the NFL as anyone in its history. “I look for the roots of Bill in places that I’m visiting, and they’re always there,” Young, now an ESPN analyst who travels to each 
Monday Night Football
 game for the network, said in an NFL Films interview. “The game was coached, played, managed, owned in a very archaic way for a long time. And Bill changed that fundamentally at every level forever.”

Two of Walsh’s primary rivals during the 1980s—the Chicago Bears and Washington Redskins—had schematic geniuses of their own. Another, the Bengals, would eventually speed up the league with one of Walsh’s favorite students at the helm.

Monsters: The 46 Defense

Buddy Ryan is best known as the man who brought the 46 Defense to Chicago in the 1980s, creating perhaps the finest defensive unit the NFL has ever seen. But his entire story is interesting as well. An Army sergeant in the Korean War while he was still in his teens, Ryan worked his way through several small colleges as a coach before getting his big break with the New York Jets in 1968 as their defensive line coach. Ryan saw the extent to which head coach Weeb Ewbank went out of his way to devise protection schemes for Joe Namath and his wobbly knees, and it occurred to the then-defensive line coach that if there was such a premium put on the protection of quarterbacks, there must be equal value in the disruption of the position. That was the start of Ryan’s blitz packages, which helped the Jets upset the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III.

Hired as the Chicago Bears’ defensive coordinator in 1978 after eight years with the Jets and two more with the Minnesota Vikings, Ryan started to assemble a more traditional defense with iffy talent, but it wasn’t the dominant Bears defense it would later become. Chicago finished 10–6 in 1979 with a defense that finished third in points allowed and sixth in yards allowed, but that was the outlier at that time. Inconsistency was the order of the day.

Ryan’s point of desperation came in Week 7 of the 1981 season, when the Detroit Lions beat the living hell out of his defense in a 48–17 thrashing. Detroit quarterback Eric Hipple completed just 14-of-25 passes, but those passes traveled 336 yards, and four of them resulted in touchdowns. Rick Kane, a running back who amassed a grand total of 1,486 yards in his entire NFL career, ran for 101 yards. The Bears fell to 1–6 on the season, and Ryan knew something had to change. “Our pass rush wasn’t worth a shit,” Ryan said in 
The Games That Changed the Game
. “We had to find a way to create more pocket pressure because we were getting beaten up by every quarterback in the league.” 

That would be a challenge because Chicago’s next opponent was the San Diego Chargers, who finished the 1981 season ranked first overall in points, yards, passing yards, first downs, passing touchdowns, net yards per passing attempt, and rushing touchdowns. If Ryan was going to unleash a new defense against any opponent, this was the toughest imaginable. The Chargers of Don Coryell, Dan Fouts, and Kellen Winslow were the best vertical passing team in the league.

But nobody ever accused Ryan of lacking guts. Or brains. Ryan debuted an iteration of the 46 Defense against the Chargers—a 5-1-5 formation in which defensive backs blitzed from various areas and linemen were lined up in unexpected places. The 46 Defense (named for the jersey number of safety Doug Plank) had elements of the old Umbrella Defense and Greasy Neale’s Stack Defense, but this was a different, far more flexible, animal. “Football is chess,” Plank said in 
Monsters: The 1985 Chicago Bears and the Wild Heart of Football
. “You can capture all my pawns, but if I tip over that king, I win.” 

And the Chargers had no earthly clue what to do against this scheme. Fouts had his worst day as an NFL quarterback, completing just 13-of-43 passes for 295 yards with two touchdowns and two interceptions. Ryan countered San Diego’s multiple weapons in the passing game by hurrying the count, forcing Fouts to get the ball out more quickly than he would have liked. The Chargers kept their running backs in more often, which took some of Fouts’ targets away, and those backs rushed for a total of just 61 yards on 20 carries because it’s not easy to run the ball against a talented eight-man front. Otis Wilson, the only true linebacker on the field, was in charge of covering Winslow, who was shredding the rest of the league as the game’s best hybrid tight end, and he caught four passes for 78 yards. Receiver Charlie Joiner had a bigger day with five catches for 124 yards and a touchdown, but battery mate Wes Chandler was limited to two catches for 69 yards. Yes, the Bears gave up big plays in the passing game with a scant secondary—as a result of all the action up front—but Ryan had gambled on the idea that an abundance of pressure would overcome that negative effect. He was absolutely right, and the Bears eked out a 20–17 overtime win.

Moreover, since the alignments weren’t common, the Chargers didn’t know how to block them. “We’d never seen this defense before
 and weren’t prepared to deal with it,” running back Hank Bauer said. “When that happens, it’s pretty tough to change the gameplan you came in with. And they whacked us around pretty hard.” 

The Bears defenders knew that their coach was on to something. If this could work against the best offense in the league, how would other offenses adapt to it? Ryan’s concepts weren’t enough to get the offensively-challenged Bears over the hump in 1981, but the team started putting more talent in place. Wilson had been selected in the first round of the 1980 draft, and linebacker Mike Singletary and safety Jeff Fisher came aboard a year later. The 1983 draft brought end Richard Dent and safety Dave Duerson. Linebacker Wilber Marshall—the most physically gifted player on the defensive side—was taken in the first round in 1984. Cornerback Leslie Frazier was an undrafted free agent from Alcorn State, free safety Gary Fencik was a 10
th
-round pick of the Miami Dolphins, and tackle Steve McMichael was a castoff from the New England Patriots. 

Eventually, the Bears presented Ryan with the right combination of intensity and experience to make the 46 Defense the most formidable in the NFL. The 1985 Bears, the most famous version, gave up the fewest points and yards while leading the league in turnovers and sacks and blazing a trail of pure hell through the season. During one three-game stretch in the regular season, the Bears scored more points on defense than they allowed on offense and they’re the only team in history to post back-to-back shutouts in the playoffs.

The Patriots scored 10 points in Super Bowl XX, but the Bears knew the game was theirs from the moment they saw quarter­back Tony Eason move under center for New England’s first offensive play. “When you looked into [Eason’s] eyes, you saw the same eyes the first time we played them this year, a little confused,” Singletary said. “We got to him early and rattled him a bit. So I thought, 
Let’s go get him
.” Added Fencik: “We thought if we put him in a situation where he had to win the game for them, he couldn’t do it. They pretty much conceded they couldn’t run against us.”

The Bears throttled Eason out of the game and made life equally miserable for Steve Grogan, Eason’s veteran replacement. New England’s quarterbacks were sacked seven times, and the Patriots gained just 123 total yards. Chicago caused six turnovers and allowed seven rushing yards. It was Ryan’s last game with the team—he had accepted the Philadelphia Eagles’ offer to become their head coach—and Ryan’s defenders dedicated their performance to him, carrying him off the field of the Superdome—a very unusual gesture for a defensive coordinator, but fully appropriate in this case. 

The Chicago Bears’ 46 Defense

“The 46 Defense—to make it very plain and to the point—is all about pressure,” Singletary said in 
America’s Game
. “It is all about pressure. We’re going to come at you. And we’re going to hit your quarterback until you get another one in. It was a nightmare, I know, for the quarterback. First of all, you had Otis [Wilson] and Wilber [Marshall] next to each other, and the quarterback’s looking out of his eye. Then, you’ve got [Richard] Dent on the other side. Then, you’ve got Dan Hampton in the middle, and the Fridge [William Perry], and Steve McMichael. That’s not good.”

What made it even less good for opposing offenses was that blocking the base 46 front was a nightmare. Ryan put his nose tackle right over the head of the center and then aligned his two three-technique defenders to the outside shoulders of the guards. These alignments made it very difficult for offensive lines to double-team anyone on the inside because the outside leverage to either guard forced the guards away from the center, who was dealing with the nose tackle one-on-one. 

Ryan took his strong-side and weak-side linebackers out of the traditional middle area they’d roam in the standard 4-3 defense. Instead, he aligned them to either side of the tight end. The middle linebacker and strong safety were responsible for second-level run support and blitz assignments, and the cornerbacks and free safety were responsible for one-on-one coverage. Ordinarily, putting a three-man secondary on islands over and over would be a recipe for disaster, but Ryan’s pressure concepts kept teams from developing the kinds of route concepts that would take advantage. 

If you blocked Chicago’s six-man 46 base front, you weren’t accounting for the middle linebacker, who would blast right up the gut and destroy whatever was going on in the backfield, depending on whether the running backs stayed home to block or not. And if you kept a seventh man in to block the middle linebacker, that didn’t take care of the strong safety, who would blitz with alarming alacrity. Basically, however you guessed against the 46 Defense, you guessed wrong. “We’re gonna keep coming,” Singletary said. “And we’re gonna keep you thinking. We’re not ducking and dodging. We’re gonna have fun out there because the 46 Defense is physical, and it’s as nasty as you want to get.” 

The 46 was also smart. It was an aggressive defense that thought on its feet, and that’s because Ryan had the kinds of players who could adjust to various offensive concepts. The Bears adapted to offensive shifts with two pre-snap counters—Automatic Front and Coverage (AFC) and Blitz to Formation (BTF). AFC marked the ways in which the players on the field guided by Singletary would adjust to the offensive formations they saw. The reads they got often were so simple that Singletary could call out the play before it happened. 

The Bears could switch from 4-3 to 3-4 looks, bring what looked like extreme blitzes, and drop into multiple coverages. The AFC gave the 46 a level of complexity that took it far beyond a situational blitz package. The Bears never truly used it as their base defense—Ryan preferred a more traditional 4-3 set based on personnel—but the 46 transcended the era because you could build flexibility into it. And it was severely confusing to opposing offenses, who watched as the players in the 46 front moved from strong-side to weak-side, from the inside shoulder to the outside shoulder, and from the line to linebacker depth based on the call.

BTF, as Singletary explained in 
The Games That Changed the Game
, was the engine behind Chicago’s dizzying array of blitz formations and concepts, and it was more complex than anything else the NFL had going at the time. “When Buddy clapped his hands, there were about 30 or 40 different things that could happen, depending on what our opponent’s formation was, where the receivers were lined up, the backfield set, down and distance. We’d factor all that in and make an on-the-spot choice as to where we were going to go with the best blitz for that situation. We’re going to run certain fronts. Our corners would do certain things in tandem with our safety. There had to be a lot of communication within that clap Buddy conveyed to our defense.”

It also required an agile mind, as Singletary found out the hard way in his first NFL start, which happened to be that overtime win against the Chargers in 1981. Ryan benched Singletary early—and for the rest of the game—after the young linebacker wasted a timeout based on his confusion over a defensive call.

Ryan wasn’t always easy to deal with—as a person or as a coach. His three-pronged grading scale while watching film with his players had specific designations: “dumbass,” “horseshit,” and “asshole.” Once in a while, Dent said, you might hear, “Good play.” Rex Ryan remembered that “Dad called players only by their numbers until they did something he liked. ‘Hey 51, get your ass in gear!’ That kind of stuff. If you played hard for him and bled for him, he’d suddenly remember your name just fine.” Buddy Ryan’s one season as the Houston Oilers’ defensive coordinator is remembered most for the time he took a swing at offensive coordinator Kevin Gilbride on the sideline…during a game.

Most of Ryan’s players had a love-hate relationship with him. He was hard on them at the best of times, but he also trusted them (when they’d earned that trust) to call things on the field in ways that brought out the best in them. Hired as the Bears’ coach before the 1983 season, Mike Ditka had a far more simple relationship with Ryan—barely any at all. Ryan believed he should have been hired when Ditka was, and it was never easy between those two hard-headed men. “I’m not happy he’s gone—I’m elated,” Ditka said to the 
Los Angeles Times
 after Ryan accepted the Eagles job. “Never again in history will an assistant coach get as much credit as Buddy did. I handled it well. It will be interesting to see how he handles it, now that he’s the head coach…He took a lot of bows, and I let him take them. But he didn’t let any of his assistants take any bows. Some people don’t give credit to anyone else. Why doesn’t [offensive line coach] Dick Stanfel get more credit? We led the league in rushing three years in a row.”

Ryan was nonplussed when told of Ditka’s happiness at his departure. “I should be so lucky to have a Buddy Ryan around. I’d like to have somebody around to take care of me.”

Neither Ryan nor Ditka was as successful without the other. The defense Buddy left behind for the 1986 season was actually statistically better, setting a record for points allowed in a season that stood until 2000, when the Baltimore Ravens broke it. But new defensive coordinator Vince Tobin drew the ire of his players by eliminating elements of the 46 over time. Meanwhile, Ryan’s tenures as a head coach in Philadelphia and the Arizona Cardinals were generally marked by great defenses and too little attention paid to the offensive side of the ball. Balance wasn’t Buddy’s thing. But the 46 Defense was more balanced than it was made out to be.

As the NFL moved to more three and four-receiver sets, the 46 fell out of vogue to a degree; coaches weren’t willing to take the coverage risks against more diverse offenses. Jeff Fisher took elements of it with him as a head coach for the Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans from 1994 through 2010 and with the St. Louis Rams from 2012 to 2016. The real keepers of the 46 flame are Buddy’s sons, Rex and Rob, who have called it in different ways since their days as dueling defensive coordinators for Oklahoma and Oklahoma State in the late 1990s. When Rex became the Baltimore Ravens’ defensive coordinator in 2005, he was eager to bring 46 aspects to a defense that was already historically great and had the personnel to run it. Ray Lewis took Singletary’s old spot as the brains of the outfit, and the Ravens ranked first in the league in both points and yards allowed in 2006—something they didn’t even do in their Super Bowl season of 2000. In 2000 they lost the yards allowed title to…Fisher’s Titans. “We’re going to be aggressive,” Rex told 
The Washington Post
 in the summer of 2005. “We’re not just going to play the 46 because my dad is going to kick my [rear] or something. We’re going to play it because it makes sense. This defense is hard to block.” 

 Rex used it as the head coach of the New York Jets from 2009 through 2014 and then when he became the Buffalo Bills head coach.

Rex Ryan’s 46 Defense

As to the 46’s supposed vulnerabilities against spread option attacks and other multiple offensive fronts, Rex was just as defiant as his dad used to be. “We aren’t sure where this rumor of a supposed weakness to the option originated, but you can probably guess that it was started by an option coach who didn’t want to deal with the 46 on a weekly basis,” he wrote in his book, 
Coaching Football’s 46 Defense
.

To be fair, Rex also added several wrinkles to the base 46—linebackers had more assignments, ends slow played read-option quarterbacks, and deep zone concepts prevented the leaks downfield caused by a more consistently aggressive attack. In the Cover-3 example shown, the weak-side linebacker and strong safety switch positional assignments—the weak-side linebacker drops into coverage, the defensive backs move to zones dependent on the situation, and the linebackers are tasked to adjust to crossing routes in new ways. Although Buddy wanted to dictate an offense’s terms on a non-negotiable basis, Rex understood that in a more complicated football world, adaptations would be necessary. As to the debate of the greatest defense in NFL history, Rex was the defensive line coach for one of the universal entrants, the 2000 Ravens, and he deferred to his dad. “Opponents who played Baltimore thought they had a chance to beat us right up until the game began,” he said. “Then they’d start playing and realize our speed and size was too much to overcome. Before teams played the Bears, they weren’t even thinking about winning. They were just hoping to survive. They didn’t want to get the crap kicked out of them. The ’85 Bears had teams beat before they even played.”

The Counter Trey and Three Quarterbacks: How Joe Gibbs Beat the NFL

Unlike Bill Walsh’s San Francisco 49ers and Rex Ryan’s Chicago Bears defense, the Washington Redskins weren’t totally down in the dumps when they received their schematic injection in the 1980s. When Redskins owner Jack Kent Cooke hired Joe Gibbs to be his new head coach in January of 1981, the team had avoided a losing record in four of the previous five seasons, though there had not been a playoff berth since 1977. But Gibbs, who Hall of Fame general manager Bobby Beathard recommended to Cooke, had a set of innovations and adaptations that became supremely successful. 

Gibbs inherited some offensive stars—quarterback Joe Theismann and running back John Riggins in particular—and then eventually tweaked his scheme to fit them. To Riggins’ power running style, Gibbs and his staff turned an offensive line full of castoffs and underrated players into the famed Hogs. Both 
40
 and 
50 Gut
 power running plays were staples of the Gibbs offense, but Gibbs is best-known for two things—the H-back and the Counter Trey running play.

After starting 0–5 in his first season, Gibbs committed to the players he had instead of the players he wanted—perhaps inspired by a heart-to-heart talk he had with Theismann. The veteran quarterback expressed his commitment to the team, and things proceeded positively from there. “We started to go to the two-tight-end offense,” Theismann said in 
America’s Game
. “We started to change and run the football a little bit more. We became more of a control-the-game-style offense versus a ‘Let’s try and outscore the world’ offense.”

Gibbs put the H-back in as a specific response to the pass-rushing outside linebacker in the 3-4 defenses that were popular in the decade. The H-back was a hybrid tight end/fullback blocking in the formation just behind and outside either tackle. Depending on the play call, the H-back could block the outside pass rusher specifically, stem out to block a cornerback on an outside run, address a blitzing safety on a pass, move to the other side of the formation to seal a block on a counter play, or become a big factor in Gibbs’ specific receiver formation designs—especially the trips concept. The H-back could also move along the formation pre-snap, depending on the call, to further enhance the overall blocking picture.

The Counter Trey took advantage of Gibbs’ belief in the one-back system. Since he’d moved the traditional fullback position out to the tackles, he wanted something that would fool defensive linemen with a power element. Gibbs actually had several counters, but the Counter Trey was the most famous version—not that the coach came up with it on his own. “We stole it,” Gibbs told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 2008. “We saw some film on Nebraska, and Tom Osborne was doing some really innovative things with his line up front, and we were watching it and thought, 
God, that is good stuff
. So we stole it. We all steal things. You can talk to me all day, and I’ll never say I was the first guy to do anything because, sure as heck, there is some coach out there who did it first.”

The Washington Redskins’ Counter Trey

But it was the Redskins that ran it with great success throughout the Gibbs era with backs from Riggins to George Rogers to Timmy Smith to Earnest Byner. It didn’t matter who ran the Redskins counters—the line would make them go. “No matter what you have in football, you need something you can do really well and run it over and over again,” Gibbs said. “We had the counter game.” 

It was a brutally intelligent and effective combination of misdirection and power. Gibbs directed the linemen on the strong side to execute standard gap blocks, and the H-back sealed the edge against the outside linebacker. Those gap blocks were taken one step to the weak-side to get the defensive line rolling the wrong way. (That was for a 3-4 defense; against 4-3 over and under fronts and certain kinds of blitzes, the H-back and gap blockers might have different responsibilities.) The weak-side tackle and guard would pull all the way over to the strong side of the formation. Meanwhile, the quarterback sold the counter game by moving to the weak side, and the running back took a step in that direction as well. The optimal result: a defense was one step slow to the ball, and two blockers led the way for Gibbs’ power back. 

Gibbs was also an advocate of run action. He directed his blockers to fire out on play-action passes, fooling the defensive line and linebackers into aggression when they should have played it differently. And he was very big on draw and delay plays for the same reason; Gibbs had a special talent for putting enemy defenses on a string.

But it wasn’t just the Counter Trey that made Washington’s offense special. Gibbs coached under Don Coryell in two different locations. He was Coryell’s running backs coach for the St. Louis Cardinals from 1973 through 1977 and Coryell’s offensive coordinator with the San Diego Chargers in 1979 and 1980. Thus, he was completely conversant in the nuances of the vertical passing game and on the cutting edge when it came to formation diversity. Gibbs knew that there would be openings for the deep pass if he could make the power running game consistently effective. 

Gibbs was one of the first NFL coaches to use the bunch formation, where three receivers either line up or align via pre-snap movement into a triangle on one side of the field. His playbook was also heavy with trips formations, in which three receivers lined up to one side and worked to flood that side of the coverage. “You try to cover them man-to-man, and somebody’s going to get picked off right away,” Houston Oilers head coach (and Gibbs’ predecessor in Washington) Jack Pardee said in 1992. “You zone them, and they kill you that way. They’ve got such a balanced attack that almost anything they try on you is probably going to work, passing or running. It’s a very scary offense. They’ll always get five, six yards on first down and then they’ll always convert on third and 3, third and 2. It’s an offense that can do everything.”

By the time the Redskins won their third Super Bowl at the end of the 1991 season, Gibbs’ offense was just about impossible to stop. The Redskins finished in the top five in points scored six times in his first tenure there and three straight times from 1989 through 1991. That was after Riggins was long gone and Gibbs was still blowing defenses away with multiple quarterbacks and running backs. His status as the only coach to win three Super Bowls with three different quarterbacks (Joe Theismann, Doug Williams, Mark Rypien) is an amazing record that has a pretty good shot of standing forever. 

Sam Wyche and the No-Huddle Offense

Sam Wyche, who had been Bill Walsh’s backup to the backup quarterback with the Cincinnati Bengals and his coaching confidant with the San Francisco 49ers, left the Bay Area in 1984 to take the job Walsh had wanted for so long—head coach of the Bengals. Wyche took many aspects of the West Coast Offense with him, but he was also an inveterate tinkerer with formations, concepts, and rules. He would huddle with more than 11 players to confuse defenses, a tactic which has since been outlawed by the NFL.

But the biggest innovation Wyche brought to the league was the use of the no-huddle offense as a primary function. “Originally, we did it to change the tempo,” Wyche told TheMMQB.com in 2015. “We would go fast and then slow it down, then we would go fast, fast, fast for a couple—and then slow it down so [the defense] didn’t know what was coming. Then we decided we’ve got to be careful that when we slow it down they don’t get fresh people in, so we came up with what we called ‘set alerts.’ If the defense tries to substitute, we yell, ‘Set alert!’ That meant we’re going to get to the line, the ball is coming up quick, and we’re running a play that we had memorized. We would catch them with too many men on the field, which you still see happen.”

Not that it was his idea. Teams had been running no-huddle for decades in the two-minute drill—perhaps most famously in the 1958 NFL Championship Game between the Baltimore Colts and New York Giants—but it was Wyche who codified the idea in more of a full-time sense. “I’m a believer in the coaching tree,” Wyche told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1989. “It’s important to know where ideas started. Once Hank Stram and I were talking, and he said, ‘I wonder why teams don’t just go ahead and do it?’ That kicked me in. You can’t go into every game saying, ‘We’ll just damn well outplay you.’ You’re looking for the 2 percent edge, the surprise of a safety blitz, the surprise of having fourth and 12 on your own 25 and going for it. These things are sound. They work.”

Wyche started running the no-huddle more and more in the late 1980s with great effectiveness. In fact it was so effective that opponents started faking injuries to slow down the tempo. And this brought serious repercussions in the second most important game Wyche ever coached. 

Less than two hours before the 1988 AFC Championship Game between the Bengals and Buffalo Bills, Wyche was informed by the league that if his team used a quick count in the no-huddle as determined by the officials, the Bengals would be penalized and the down replayed. “Pete Rozelle cannot change a rule,” Wyche said. “That has to be done by 28 owners, and obviously 28 owners haven’t congregated overnight. We played for 17 games to get here for this championship game under one set of rules interpreted one way. We have used the no-huddle offense for three-and-a-half years. It has been endorsed by [supervisor of officials] Art McNally and the commissioner. It’s the principle.”

Wyche didn’t stand on principle in the game, which the Bengals won 21–10. His offense led the league in points that year, and his defense coached by Dick LeBeau was good enough to shut the Bills down. That playoff victory brought Wyche head-to-head with Walsh in Super Bowl XXIII. It was, of course, Walsh’s last game and it was Joe Montana’s last-minute touchdown drive that upended the go-go Bengals 20–16. It was also ironic that the same Bills franchise that had been jawing so much about the no-huddle would use it as a functional construct of the teams that went to four straight Super Bowls in the next decade.

