# Section 11

---



7. A New Level: The NFL in the 1990s

“If my answers frighten you, Vincent, you should cease asking scary questions.” 

—Samuel L. Jackson as Jules Winnfield in 
Pulp Fiction 

With i
ts widespread schematic complexity and big personalities, the NFL had become the unquestioned glamour game of America in the 1980s, and that would continue upward into the 1990s, when several constructs built in the previous decade came to full fruition. More than in any other decade, coaches on both sides of the ball furiously sought to outdo each other in what turned out to be the most inventive decade in the league’s annals. Most of those inventions carry on today and will do so in the future under altered names and in different guises. 

The Mouse that Scored: The Run-and-Shoot Takes Over

While the Sid Gillman-rooted vertical passing game, Bill Walsh’s West Coast Offense, and the no-huddle offense all showed the way to more consistently explosive offensive production through the 1980s, the NFL’s implementation of the Run-and-Shoot offense throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s took things to an entirely new level. The Run-and-Shoot had been wildly successful at the collegiate level for years and in the USFL through the mid-1980s, but those in the NFL responsible for such decisions found it difficult to take it seriously as a base concept—until they were dominated by it. 

Officially invented by Glenn “Tiger” Ellison in 1958 after the Middletown, Ohio, high school coach watched a bunch of grade school kids play football on a field as he was driving home from a practice, the offense featured four receivers who adjusted their routes based on the defenders, a single running back, no tight end, relatively little in the way of designed play calls, and a quarterback who operated within a moving pocket. Ellison installed the offense for his team the next day, and what was essentially an advanced version of the old double-wing offense got its start. Ellison called it the “Lonesome Polecat” at first because Stan Lewis, Ellison’s offensive line coach had said, “Call it the ‘Lonesome Polecat’ because it stinks!” Eventually, Ellison took an offense with a few reads and plays and developed it into what he called the Run-and-Shoot. 
“
If a man will picture his problem vividly in his mind, brand it on his brain, drive it into his heart, suddenly during a relaxed moment when the situation seems most hopeless, the right answer will pop,” Ellison said in his book, 
Run and Shoot Football: The Now Attack
. “Put a demand on nature, and she will supply the need. From out of nowhere one bright fall morning popped the ‘Lonesome Polecat’ bringing us the right answer.” 

Ellison’s other pivotal book, 
Run and Shoot Football: Offense of the Future
, was published in 1965 and made its way to the desk of a coach named Darrell “Mouse” Davis, who would take the Run-and-Shoot to entirely new levels through the ensuing decades. From Milwaukie High School in Oregon, to Portland State, to the Canadian Football League, to the USFL, Davis took his version of the Run-and-Shoot wherever he went and he was always successful with it. At Portland State his teams set 20 NCAA Division I-AA marks and led the nation in scoring three times. In Toronto his offense took the Argonauts from last place to a Grey Cup title. For the Houston Gamblers in 1984, Davis’ offense racked up 5,795 passing yards and 45 passing touchdowns in 18 games while being piloted by future NFL Hall of Famer Jim Kelly. The Gamblers’ “Mouseketeers” group of receivers boasted the first duo of pass catchers (Richard Johnson and Ricky Sanders) to each amass more than 100 receptions in a single season. 

But when Davis entered the NFL, many of the more traditional minds throughout the league derided the Run-and-Shoot as a gimmick that would not last against the best defensive competition. Buddy Ryan famously called it the “chuck-and-duck,” and several coaches balked at the idea for different reasons—the running game wasn’t variable enough with its traps and draws, the lack of a tight end left quarterbacks too vulnerable, and the overall offense wasn’t consistently effective in the end zone. It was going to take a schematic evangelist to escort the Run-and-Shoot into the NFL, and that’s exactly what Davis was. “They won’t want to look at the facts,” Davis told the 
Los Angeles Times
 of his detractors in 1990. “They just want to bitch about something.”

Not surprisingly, the NFL’s ultimate acceptance for the Run-and-Shoot began in the city that housed the league’s worst offense the year before. In 1988 the Detroit Lions finished dead last in the NFL in total offense (3,405 yards), offensive plays (920), yards per play (3.7), first downs (226), offensive touchdowns (20), and total points (220). There were two head coaches (Darryl Rogers and Wayne Fontes) and two offensive coordinators (Bob Baker and Lew Carpenter), and nobody could figure out how to get the ball in the end zone. 

Fontes was the team’s interim head coach for the last five games of the 1988 season, and one of the first things he did when the team made it official was to hire Davis as his offensive coordinator. Teams had run plays with four receivers before, of course. The four-vertical concept was a staple of the Gillman offense and ran through the playbooks of everyone from Don Coryell to Joe Gibbs to Mike Martz all the way to Kevin Gilbride with the New York Giants through the 2013 season. But as a base offense? That was just too much, it was assumed. The assumptions were incorrect—at least at first.

In 1989 the Lions improved to 19
th
 in points scored and 18
th
 in yards gained. In 1990 they moved up to fifth in points and 14
th
 in yards. When the Lions’ defense matched the high-octane offense in 1991, Detroit made it all the way to the NFC Championship Game before losing to the Washington Redskins. The 12 wins the Lions put up in the 1991 regular season is still the most in franchise history, and that was the last time the franchise came away with a division title. In those first three seasons with Davis as the offensive coordinator, the results were achieved with three different primary quarterbacks—Bob Gagliano in 1989, Rodney Peete in 1990, and Erik Kramer in 1991. 

The differences in this offense were obvious and effective. Before the West Coast Offense, receivers primarily got open through their own physical gifts and intellectual guile—feints at the line of scrimmage, covert push-offs, pure downfield speed. Walsh’s offense directed its receivers to move in precision as part of a perfectly orchestrated symphony. In the Run-and-Shoot, the receivers were asked to define their routes on the defense’s actions. Walsh also called for this, but the Run-and-Shoot directed receivers to do it with more frequency. Quarterbacks would make their first key off the safety closest to the line of scrimmage. If the safeties were deep, there was always a square-in to run underneath the coverage. If the receiver could beat the safety to the near side of the field, that could be the play right there. “The concept of reading the coverage, nobody did it,” June Jones, who was Davis’ quarterbacks and receivers coach in Detroit and installed his own versions of the Run-and-Shoot with the Houston Oilers and Atlanta Falcons over the years, told Grantland. “Even when I was a player in 1977, every Monday they’d say look at the next team and tell us what you think will work. Well, I’d write a book on reading and how to read the routes and all that stuff. But nobody in the NFL back then allowed their receivers to read coverage. If you’re running a curl, you’re running a curl. That was it. There was no conversion.”

The conversion first happened when Ellison realized that the kids he was watching were simply adjusting their routes to what their defenders were doing. But it’s not entirely true that nobody was using option routes until the Run-and-Shoot gurus turned them on full blast. (Coryell implemented routes with different breaking patterns based on coverage with the San Diego Chargers in the 1970s and early 1980s.) Gillman had options for his receivers as well.

But in Davis’ offenses, the route conversions were manifold per receiver and they defined the passing offense to a large degree. Each receiver had specific assignments to read against coverages, and the conversions were fairly complex. Against a two-deep nickel defense alone, as Davis detailed in a 1990s coaching clinic, the possibilities were all over the place. “Our first key is the nickel back on the onside slot,” he said. “If [the nickel back] doesn’t bump over with the motion, we run the motion halfway between the Z and Y receivers and get him uncovered 95 percent of the time. If you think they are going to bounce the coverage to the motion, it doesn’t always happen. Sometimes, they want to rush the nickel back off the corner. If they don’t bump over, we take the completion the defense gives us. When the nickel bounces to the motion, we go back to our original read against the three-deep pattern. If the split receiver goes deep, the cornerback goes with him. But if you are reading the corner, when he goes back, we throw the ball to the flat. If he rolls to the flat, we throw the ball outside to the split receiver. The quarterback delivers the ball on the third or fifth step. If the cornerback runs off with the split receiver and the nickel back jumps the flat after a bump on the [receiver’s] motion, we have to go to the secondary route by the motion man. He is facing a half-field safety; he has to know that. When the motion man doesn’t get the ball on the third step, he looks at the safety. If the safety man is right on his face, the receiver runs the post. He beats the safety through the hole in the middle of the field. If the motion man runs his pattern, and the safety man is a damned mile up top, he breaks his pattern off into the middle short.”

Phew. That’s against one kind of coverage with different specific options and read assignments against other kinds of coverages. The motion of the slot receiver gave the quarterback a clue as to whether the defenses were running man or zone coverages, but a lot of this deduction happened on the fly, which is why some mistook the Run-and-Shoot as a simple thing to stop, when in fact the relative simplicity of base calls were just part of a highly nuanced post-snap offense. 

Mouse Davis’ Run-and-Shoot offense vs. a two-deep nickel defense

Davis busted all the myths of 
his
 Run-and-Shoot in an interview with Bob Oates of the 
Los Angeles Times
 in September of 1990. To the insistence that a mobile quarterback was required, he said that the rollouts were generally just a few steps, and that any taller passer with a strong arm—like Kelly with the Houston Gamblers—would do. To the insistence that his quarterbacks were injured more often because of the lack of protection, Davis cited injury data, which told a different story: stationary quarterbacks were actually more vulnerable to getting hurt. Nor was it prone to blitzing. “We don’t see many blitzers. Blitzing means single coverage, and our receivers are open right now,” he said. “The whole deal [in the Run-and-Shoot] is to get the pass off fast. Blitzers play into our strength. The defense we fear the most is one with four All-Pro pass rushers and seven All-Pro defensive backs. Great talent defeats any offense.”

Opponents of the scheme who said that the lack of a second running back and a first tight end led to a sameness that was easily defeated were countered by Davis’ assertion that because only one back can run the ball at any time, a fourth receiver puts a defense far more on edge. And Davis believed in the notion that if a tight end was big enough to be a dominant blocker, he wouldn’t be fast and agile enough to be an elite receiver. Lastly, he maintained that because the Run-and-Shoot forced defenses to play the pass far more often, running backs had more and better openings in which to gain consistent yardage. 

That final philosophy certainly worked for the Lions in the Mouse era. Of course, it helped that Barry Sanders was the Lions’ first-round draft pick in 1989. And yes, Sanders was going to be great in any system he was in, but what the Lions called the “Silver Stretch” did give opponents one more reason to pause. How do you counter this fast, mercilessly slippery back when you’re already dealing with this weird passing offense that has a higher percentage of your linebackers on the bench? “From the system they’re running out of, it makes him very elusive,” Chicago Bears middle linebacker Mike Singletary told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1990. “You not only have to figure out what’s going on, but you have to find him. You have to tackle him with good technique. If you try to blast him, chances are he’ll spin out of it, and you’ll end up looking a little silly.”

But after the 1991 season, which ended when the Lions were decimated 41–10 by the Redskins in the NFC Championship Game, Fontes went to Davis and told him that he wanted to run an offense with the tight end featured more often—that is to say, at all. Davis knew that this was his cue to leave. In the end Fontes wanted a version of the Joe Gibbs offense that had beaten his team and he hired Dan Henning to put it together. “[Fontes] said, ‘You can stay if you want to,’ but that would be kind of ridiculous,” Davis said in 1991. “We did a good job. I don’t have any bad feelings. I’m disappointed because we didn’t get a chance to finish the job we started out to do.”

Still, the Run-and-Shoot had a brief NFL future in different iterations. Jones coached it in Atlanta from 1991 through 1996 as the Falcons’ offensive coordinator and eventual head coach, and Jack Pardee ran it as the Oilers’ head coach from 1990 through 1994. The Oilers were the most star-crossed of the Run-and-Shoot teams with seemingly all the pieces in place for an NFL title but were never able to put it all together amidst dysfunction and friction among players, coaches, and the front office.

A linebacker for the Los Angeles Rams and Washington Redskins from 1957 through 1973, Pardee compiled an 87–77 record as a head coach for the Bears, Redskins, and Oilers from 1975 through 1994. But his Run-and-Shoot revelation came when he coached with Davis in the USFL with the Houston Gamblers. Before that Pardee, who was at one time as conservative and defensive-oriented a coach as the NFL could field, had another near-revelation when his offensive coordinator for the Bears in 1977, Gillman, raked him over the coals after one landmark game. When Walter Payton set the NFL record with 275 rushing yards in a single game, Gillman told Pardee that it was embarrassing that the Bears could only muster one touchdown out of all that production. The Bears beat the Minnesota Vikings 10–7, and Chicago quarterback Bob Avellini completed four of six passes for 33 yards and an interception. 

Eventually, though, the coach changed course. When the USFL folded, Pardee took those Run-and-Shoot principles to the University of Houston. In 1989 the Cougars averaged 53.5 points, 511.3 passing yards, and 624.9 total yards. Each of those marks were the best in the nation. Oilers owner Bud Adams made the call to replace Jerry Glanville with Pardee in January of 1990, saying that Pardee was the only man he wanted for the position.

Gillman, though, did not approve of Pardee’s specific way of opening up his passing offense. The father of the modern passing game was not a fan of the Run-and-Shoot. “I just feel that you can’t play without a tight end,” he said. “At times, when the situation presents itself, I would use four wide receivers and take out the tight end but certainly not on a regular basis. The fact that the quarterback works so close to the line of scrimmage, if he isn’t sacked, he’s hit. In the Tampa Bay-Detroit game the other night, Rodney Peete almost got killed. I don’t know how long a quarterback will last in that system. He had better be able to run.”

For the Oilers’ version of the Run-and-Shoot, Pardee retained Gilbride, who had been Glanville’s offensive coordinator the year before. Glanville had his mercurial moments, to be sure, but neither Pardee nor Gilbride had any idea of the drama they were in for over the next four years. The Oilers made the playoffs all four full seasons that Pardee was their head coach—and between the Run-and-Shoot executed by quarterback Warren Moon and a defense that ranked in the NFL’s top 10 in yards and points allowed in 1991 and 1992—Houston appeared to be one of the league’s real teams on the move. 

Not only did they have Moon, but they also had four perfect receivers for the Run-and-Shoot. There was Haywood Jeffires as the bigger outside receiver with legitimate franchise talent, Drew Hill as the veteran who could drive teams crazy in the slot with his superior route running, Ernest Givins as the do-it-all guy who would hurt you outside and in the slot, and the aggregate speed combination of Curtis Duncan and Tony Jones. “There’s no defensive coverage in the world that can stop four good wide receivers,” Givins told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1991. “The other team can’t say, ‘We’re going to freeze Haywood Jeffires.’ You freeze him, Curtis steps up, or Drew, or me. But if we weren’t outstanding receivers, we wouldn’t have the ability to step up and have great games. We do. We live and die by the pass; they don’t. We succeed; they don’t. Until you do it, don’t knock us. We’re happy because of what we’ve accomplished, don’t get us wrong. And we’re not trying to be greedy and get all the attention in the NFL. But give us what we deserve. That’s all we ask.”

The Oilers got a lot of credit for a while. But that all changed on January 3, 1993, in a divisional playoff game against the Buffalo Bills at Buffalo’s Rich Stadium. Moon threw four touchdown passes in the first half alone as the Oilers passed their way to a 28–3 half­time lead and a 35–3 third-quarter lead…and then everything fell apart. Jim Kelly was injured, and backup Frank Reich added his name to the pantheon of benchwarmers everywhere when he 
matched Moon, the future Hall of Famer, with four second-half touchdowns. Meanwhile, Bills head coach Marv Levy made the second-half decision to move from a defense with five and six defensive backs to a more conventional 3-4 front, stymieing the Oilers and their pass-first philosophy. The Bills crowded Houston’s smaller receivers with press coverage, splayed their linebackers out in a series of wider zones, and blitzed off the edge with aplomb. The Oilers scored just three more points as the Bills were playing pinball in the fourth quarter and saw the game slip away 41–38 in overtime. 

Defensive coordinator Jim Eddy was the man blamed for the collapse and was summarily dismissed. He was replaced by Buddy Ryan on January 30, 1993, and that’s when things got really interesting. Ryan was a man with no filter. When he came in to coach a defense, he wanted no other coach telling him how to do it. He was no fan of quarterbacks either. In the 1993 Oilers defensive playbook, he wrote that “QBs are overpaid, overrated pompous bastards, and must be punished.” He had no patience at all for the Run-and-Shoot (or, for that matter, any offense that got in the way of the conversation about his defense), and he and Gilbride were on a collision course from the start.

The 1993 Oilers started out 1–4. Moon was benched for a time in favor of Cody Carlson, a hilarious decision in retrospect. Ryan’s 46 Defense took time to stick as he matched scheme to personnel, and he would take his defense off the practice field if he didn’t like the way things were going. Pardee was more and more of a lame duck—even as the team turned things around and won their last 11 regular-season games. But no amount of winning would solve what was going on behind the scenes—a schism between Gilbride and Ryan that came to a head in the regular-season finale against the New York Jets. Ryan took a swing at Gilbride on the sideline during a game the Oilers won 24–0 to end their regular season with a 12–4 mark. But after the playoff loss to the Kansas City Chiefs, everything went out the window. Gilbride and Pardee were fired. Ryan went off to coach the Arizona Cardinals. Moon was traded to Minnesota after a decade in Houston, and for all intents and purposes, the Run-and-Shoot was done as a base offensive system. However, there were specific schematic aspects of the system that define the NFL to this day.

Although you won’t see any NFL teams running a base offense with four receivers and no tight end anymore, NFL teams use elements of the Run-and-Shoot today. Now, four-verticals passing concepts are much more complex with every receiver basing his route on the actions of a defender to a greater or lesser degree. Speedy slot receivers dominate up the seam and force defenses to pull linebackers off the field in place of defensive backs. Tight ends that barely block and are essentially big receivers frustrate their opponents and become the fourth targets for their quarterbacks. And now, NFL teams use option routes as crucial staples in their playbooks. With the increasing complexity of coverages, teams who don’t use option routes would essentially be dooming themselves. The New England Patriots, the most successful team of the new millennium, use more option routes than any other NFL team—and to great effect. “At times, there are four decisions that a receiver needs to make after the snap,” wide receivers coach Chad O’Shea told MassLive.com in early 2012. “That’s one of the advantages of our offense, that we give players a lot of flexibility within the system to take what the defense gives us. And that’s definitely something that’s unique about our offense.” 

Well, it’s unique if you’re not aware of the Run-and-Shoot, though the Patriots took it to a new level. In their 2004 playbook, there were 25 different single receiver routes, and that doesn’t count all the available options. Nor does it cover where those routes are run in a split on the field or how the receivers run routes in tandem. There were 17 different two-man route combos and five different three-man route combos. Once you’ve mastered all that, there’s the matter of the call in any pass play—the name of the route group that a team decides for any pass play. Add in the protection at the line and you have the start of what will be an eventual Patriots play call.

For example, in the 
1 Out ZAC Slot
 play, the fullback (lined up wide left) runs a 14-yard in, though he should look for an outside release if anyone’s cheating up expecting something quick. The halfback reads blitz, hits a run sneak through the A-gap if he’s free, and digs sharply to the right. The X or iso receiver does a sight adjustment, reads the coverage, and could either come back outside or loop to the seam, depending again on the coverage. The Z receiver motions from right slot and heads six yards upfield into a four-way option. The Y receiver could turn a chute route or he might hook inside.

1 Out ZAC Slot
 in The New England Patriots’ offense

That’s one pass play—
one variation of a subgroup
—in a playbook that would rival the phone book for any large metropolis in overall ginormosity. “I have to trust in Deion [Branch] and Wes [Welker] and all those guys out there to be in the right spot so I can play fast and anticipate what they’re doing,” Patriots quarterback Tom Brady told 
The Boston Globe
 in 2012. “If everyone is not on the same page, it doesn’t work. A lot of what these practices are about is everybody getting on the same page. You have a lot of new guys from other teams, rookies. The faster we can get up to speed and get better as a unit, the better we’re going to be.”

And getting everyone on the same page involved every possible receiver understanding the properties of the team’s own individual option routes. That may in the end be the Run-and-Shoot’s greatest lasting legacy—the NFL taking Ellison’s quick “He go/I stay” mantra and turning it into another dimension in the passing game. 

In a West Coast Offense, when timing is the order of the day, you’ll see things like “U Take Off” calls (in which an in-line tight end is directed to run up the seam off an in route based on coverage) or a “Deep Over” option where a receiver is tasked to read the safety coverage and head up the seam if it’s single-high or the safety to his side is otherwise occupied. On one play an outside receiver may have to discern—and in a big hurry—whether he’s running a hot route (close to the quarterback most likely on a blitz read), a 15-yard in-cut or curl, or a 20-yard dash upfield. Obviously, if the quarterback and receiver aren’t in sync on this, the quarterback will get pummeled, the ball will fall harmlessly to the ground in a place where the receiver isn’t, or someone with the wrong uniform will be catching the pass.

In a three-digit system like the ones employed by the Chargers of Gillman and Coryell and later by Mike Martz with the “Greatest Show on Turf”
 
St. Louis Rams, different issues arise. Receivers are directed to break their routes at times to adjust to a scrambling or pressured quarterback. Martz told his receivers to “break at a friendly angle” to the quarterback. On a simple halfback post, the back could have as many as three different options once he hit the middle of the field based on the coverage. And the receivers? The Rams set up different calls for their routes based on six alternate coverage concepts—retreat zone, retreat man, cloud, trail, bump, and quads. Some adjustments are minimal per those coverages (an up-and-in or chop translates pretty well), while others direct receivers to take different cuts, route tails, or both based on what they see.

With all those inherent complications in all those different systems, the idea with modern option routes is to simplify the process as much as possible without dumbing the offense down and negating the advantage of the option concept. That’s where practice comes in. And more practice. After that, a little more practice. Preceded and followed by a long time in meeting rooms, coordinating assignments. “Most everything we do has an option to it,” Seattle Seahawks receivers coach Kippy Brown (who directed receivers in a run-based West Coast Offense) told me in 2012. “There are very few routes that are what we call ‘run-it’ routes. Those are routes that stay on, no matter what. Usually, you have a conversion of some kind. Now, routes I’ve been associated with that are called options are normally slot routes. Guys in the slot will do certain things depending on how [the defense plays] you. We do our share of those. In the West Coast Offense, an option route could go either way. A lot of people call it a ‘jerk’ route—where you go in, set the linebacker up, and then go either way. It depends on the terminology and what you want to call an option route, but in our offense, nearly every route has a conversion. If they do this, you do that.”

And that’s where it becomes complicated for the modern quarterback—or, more accurate to say, where it can’t become too complicated. Not only does the quarterback have to read the defense; he also has to know that his receivers are reading the defense the same way he is…and that they’re adjusting accordingly. This becomes especially important for teams running more and more no-huddle offenses, as many NFL teams are these days. Your play call may be abbreviated because you have to get up to the line, and while the base routes would be in the name somehow, the options are then implied because there’s only so much room in the abbreviated call. “That’s why you give them clues and parameters in what they’re looking for,” Brown said. “You have to make it clear-cut, so there’s no confusion and you know that the quarterback and receivers see the same exact thing. You’re better off not having a bunch of conversions [if there’s confusion], and we have some routes that ‘leave home,’ no matter what. We run it and, if it’s not there, we go somewhere else with the ball. It depends on who you’re playing with and what they can handle, whether it’s the quarterback or receivers. That’s meeting rooms, walk-throughs, pre-practice—it takes a lot of time to get everybody on the same page, especially when you have as many plays as we run. They have to learn the system first. Then they have to learn the conversions.”

The Zone Blitz

Mouse Davis’ ouster from the NFL and the 1993 Houston Oilers’ immolation aside, another thing that killed the Run-and-Shoot as a functional construct in the NFL was the zone blitz. Teams had tried everything from dime coverage to jailbreak blitzes to counter the Run-and-Shoot put forth by the Atlanta Falcons, Detroit Lions, and Houston Oilers in the late 1980s and early 1990s, but it was the zone blitz and its elements of multiple coverage and hidden pressure that forced those Run-and-Shoot teams back to more traditional formations. 

Put simply, the zone blitz is a set of schemes in which the quarterback reads certain players as rushers and others as coverage players—only to discover that the defense he’s facing has changed after his first read. The zone blitz forced a new level of complexity in pre-snap read and route combinations. Although it wasn’t the brainchild of Dick LeBeau, the Hall of Fame defensive back and defensive coordinator made it his own and defined it in the same way that true geniuses have personified key concepts throughout NFL history. 

Of course, LeBeau would have had Hall of Fame credentials even if he never coached a down in the NFL. From 1959 through 1972, the Ohio State alum made his bones as one of the NFL’s best defensive backs, reaching three Pro Bowls and finishing his career with 62 interceptions (tied for eighth on the all-time list). After his playing career ended, LeBeau took a job as a special teams coach with the Philadelphia Eagles in 1973, working his way up to defensive backs coach of the Green Bay Packers from 1976 through 1979. He took that same job with the Cincinnati Bengals in 1980 and was promoted to defensive coordinator in 1984. 

LeBeau had been part of a blitz-happy team in Detroit and, with the advent in the early 1980s of the West Coast Offense and its short, precise passes, he now wanted to devise a way to fool offensive schemes that were far more varied and complex. “My hope was to make [the offense] read [the defense] as one thing and let the attack be something else,” he told 
The Cincinnati Enquirer
 in 1997. “Show pressure and play zone. You have to be willing to take a guy who is usually a point-of-attack player and trust them to drop off the line a little bit. You wouldn’t ask them to cover passes for a living, but they hold up in this defense.”

LeBeau’s first point-of-attack player was David Fulcher, a huge (6
’
3
”
, 236-pound) safety who was selected in the third round of the 1986 draft and became his coach’s first specific weapon in the zone blitz. During his time as the defensive coordinator of the Bengals and Pittsburgh Steelers, LeBeau and the zone blitz became as one in public perception and synonymous with defensive excellence. 

Before LeBeau made it work with the Bengals, though, he took a trip to see LSU head coach and former Miami Dolphins defensive coordinator Bill Arnsparger, who had used the zone blitz in different iterations through the 1970s and early 1980s. Like LeBeau, Arnsparger wanted a scheme that combined blitz pressure with a safer coverage concept. “Normal blitzes use man-to-man blitz coverage,” Arnsparger wrote in his seminal book, 
Coaching Defensive Football
. “The zone blitz uses zone coverage but presents protection problems to the offense. The offensive line and one or two backs are assigned to block the defensive line and linebackers. In the zone blitz, the linebacker blitzes along with a secondary player, but the offensive pick-up is different…because defensive linemen who usually rush are now dropping out to short inside zones to replace the linebacker and secondary player that blitz. Because of the blitzer’s path, it is difficult for the offensive lineman to adjust.”

Bill Arnsparger’s 
31 Zone to Bo

Arnsparger detailed one of the zone blitzes he used with the Dolphins in the early 1980s with defensive end Kim Bokamper as the primary instigator. As Arnsparger pointed out, Bokamper had been trained as a linebacker, and the coach used his player’s skills to anticipate the timing, spacing, and coverage responsibilities. In a 3-4 base front—and with Bokamper as the weak-side end dropping into coverage—
31 Zone to Bo
 created all kinds of problems for opposing offenses. Because for every blitzing linebacker (two on the weak-side in this case), there was an end dropping into coverage, making the usual hot (quick passing) read against the blitz that much more complicated. 

When LeBeau came to visit Arnsparger, it was this 
31 Zone to Bo
 concept the two men discussed, regarding the establishment of defensive pressure without exposing the secondary. LeBeau took that idea back to the NFL and added iterations never seen before. In LeBeau’s zone blitzes, virtually anyone could blitz and anyone could cover. There wasn’t a set look to which offenses could adjust. LeBeau essentially split the timing of the play in half—he wanted to show the quarterback one pressure package early in the down and then to switch to something else later in the down. And because it’s very hard for any quarterback to switch his reads halfway through a play when he’s running for his life, the zone blitz worked well from the start. No less an authority than Bill Belichick has said that the zone blitz is the rare concept that needed no correction or adjustment from its inception to the current day.

Now, the challenge for LeBeau was convincing Sam Wyche, Cincinnati’s head coach, that the zone blitz was the way to go. “When I looked at it from an offensive standpoint, I saw there were problems that I didn’t know how to solve,” Wyche said in 1997. “That’s when I knew it would be tough for offenses.”

It was, especially when it was first unveiled in the 1980s, and nobody had a clue what they were seeing. LeBeau developed the zone blitz into a multi-dimensional idea, blitzing just about everyone from everywhere and throwing the most unexpected players into coverage. This author distinctly remembers Steelers nose tackle Casey Hampton, a 6
’
1
”
, 320-pound bowling ball-shaped nose tackle, successfully covering running backs on flare passes. LeBeau knew his personnel, knew who could do what, and adjusted accordingly. “It’s a circus out there,” Jacksonville Jaguars left tackle Tony Boselli 
told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1997
. “You’ve got safeties rushing where defensive ends would be, defensive ends dropping into coverage. I don’t know who I’m going to block on any pass play. You get 100 different looks against the zone blitz. That’s what it seems like, anyway. Usually I might block two guys, maybe three in a game. Last year against Pittsburgh, I blocked Chad Brown, Kevin Henry, Bill Johnson, Levon Kirkland, Carnell Lake—and I’m probably missing somebody. The whole game’s a mental exercise.”

Lake, a five-time Pro Bowler who played safety and corner­back for the Steelers from 1989 through 1998 and in zone blitz-heavy schemes devised by LeBeau and Dom Capers from 1992 through 1996, told Ron Jaworski and Greg Cosell in 
The Games That Changed the Game
 why the zone blitz was so hard for Run-and-Shoot offenses. “The zone blitz stretched the range where offensive linemen had to block,” he said. “Instead of just focusing on the front four and linebackers where they could make adjustments fairly easily, now they had to look sideline to sideline when it came to potential blitzers. Before the zone blitz, teams could bring out four wides and multiple routes because they assumed the defense would have to spend extra manpower covering those receivers. They figured they could protect pretty well under those conditions. But with nickel and dime DBs as possible blitzers, that forced offenses to eliminate the four-receiver package. They had to put the tight end in the game and keep a back in to help block. Now they only had three receivers running routes, and the advantage flipped to the defense.” 

It did until the late 1990s and early 2000s, when offensive coordinators began to realize that when you ran the ball straight into the teeth of the zone blitz, there were vulnerabilities between the ends. Because so many defenders were either blitzing off of—or dropping out of—their gaps, running backs could pick a gap and go. Mobile quarterbacks also caused zone blitz base defenses to break apart because those covering defenders had to peel off to chase the quarterback. If there was enough room and time to get a pass off, a receiver could be wide open. Coaches also started to play to the inherent weakness of the potential coverage matchups. In one famous example, Carolina Panthers nose tackle Greg Kragen had to cover Jerry Rice for two plays. Less than ideal. “If you happen to hit a seam, there’s nobody there,” Green Bay Packers assistant coach Sherman Lewis said in 
The Sporting News
. “And a play-action pass, we thought, would be very effective. Because for those defensive linemen, [they] have to make a decision. If it’s a pass, they’re going to drop. If it’s a run, they’re coming. If it’s play-action, they don’t know which one it is. They play run—they are late dropping, and that leaves a big hole in one of their zones.”

Eventually, LeBeau and acolytes like Capers and Ray Horton used the zone blitz as a specialty package, which is often the ultimate destination for concepts that find their schematic counters over time. And LeBeau was able to take it into the new millennium as the Steelers won Super Bowls XL and XLIII while being among the NFL’s best defenses. And just as the zone blitz was a factor in those wins (though not as defined as it had been in the previous era), it proved to be very helpful against modern versions of the Run-and-Shoot.

In fact, the most famous zone blitz play in NFL history came at the end of the first half of Super Bowl XLIII between the Steelers and the Arizona Cardinals on February 1, 2009. The Cardinals had the ball at the Pittsburgh 2-yard line with no timeouts and a 10–7 deficit. There were 18 seconds left on the clock as quarterback Kurt Warner strode to his position under center, and the Steelers had something special in mind. Warner took the snap, took a quick drop back against a blitz to his left side, fired a quick pass to receiver Anquan Boldin, and watched in horror as linebacker James Harrison came out of nowhere to not only intercept the pass at the goal line, but also run 100 yards in the other direction.

Pittsburgh Steelers LB James Harrison’s Pick-6 off a zone blitz in Super Bowl XLIII

It was the longest interception in Super Bowl history and perhaps the most atypical. Harrison, an undrafted free agent out of Kent State who had bounced around the league before finding his way as a pass rusher in LeBeau’s system in 2007, had dropped into coverage fewer times than any other Steelers linebacker. He had been targeted just 16 times in the regular season; his primary function was to rush the passer, which he did to the tune of 16 sacks in the 2008 season. But the Steelers knew this was the perfect place for a short goal-line pass and therefore a great setup for the zone blitz. Head coach Mike Tomlin could be heard on the sidelines telling his staff that there was no way the Cardinals were going to run on that play. 

This played to type. The 2008 Cardinals were about as close to a Run-and-Shoot base offense team as you could find in their era. There was a tight end on the interception in question, but that was a rarity. According to Football Outsiders’ charting metrics for the season, the Cardinals dialed up a four-receiver formation on 38 percent—a greater percentage than anyone else in the NFL—of their offensive snaps. They had two tight ends on the field at the same time on 13 percent of their plays, which was next to last in the league. They ran the ball in power situations (goal line and short-yardage) on just 45 percent of their plays. And in Warner they had a quarterback who had learned to run a quick passing offense frequently defined by three and five-step drops. It wasn’t quite the Lions’ Silver Stretch, but it was pretty close. “We dialed up an all-out blitz with our personnel,” Tomlin told NFL Films. “We knew we could bring one more than they could block.”

“James was called into that defense as a blitzer,” LeBeau recalled. 

“I figured they had to do a quick slant in or out,” Harrison said. “It seemed like all day we were a step late getting to [Warner]. So I figured that if I stepped at the tackle and got him to step out at me, that would free [Lawrence] Timmons to get inside on his blitz where he was supposed to be, and I’d just drop out and take a gamble.”

“In this situation we got exactly what we wanted on the outside,” Warner said. “Man-to-man coverage. We had press coverage, so it was just a little inside-out route. My eyes automatically go to the outside, and Anquan Boldin gets free exactly how we thought it was going to play out. [Harrison] takes two steps up like he’s blitzing and then he gets [engulfed] by my offensive line, so I can’t see him. I’m assuming because of the way he started, that he was blitzing. So, I let the ball go, and that’s when I picked up that James Harrison had dropped off and fallen right into the passing lane.”

“It was a route that we call ‘burst,’” receiver Larry Fitzgerald said. “I’m pushing out wide, trying to touch the numbers, and I’m coming in for a post to the back pylon. Q’s [Boldin’s] job was to run into the end zone and catch the ball quickly.” 

“It’s one of those things where they can only coach you so much,” Harrison concluded. “There comes a point in time where you’re on the field, and they’re not seeing what you’re seeing.” 

“He was doing such a good job of several things that we encourage,” LeBeau said of Harrison. “No. 1, he was thinking. No. 2, he was 100 percent correct. No. 3, he made one hell of a play. That’s one of my favorite plays ever. I think it will be one of the most remembered plays in professional football.”

Not even Arnsparger would claim to be the inventor of the zone blitz or the zone exchange, in which unexpected players work to the quarterback but are replaced in coverage with an equal number of players. Jaworski noticed Larry Eisenhauer, the 6
’
5
”
, 250-pound defensive end for the Boston Patriots, drop into coverage in the 1963 AFL Championship Game. Teams would occasionally drop linemen to cover running backs through the 1960s and 1970s, but it was the system devised by Arnsparger—and perfected by LeBeau—that holds up to this day. “On a vacation to Kentucky in 1997, I visited the new Bengals training camp at Georgetown College,” Arnsparger recalled in his book, 
Arnsparger’s Coaching Defensive Football
. “I watched a practice, and afterward Dick and I chatted. I thanked him for his kindness and congratulated him on developing the zone blitz to where it is today. The scheme has grown a great deal since its beginning. Like everything in football, when you see something good, you add your ideas and make it better—and the zone blitz is no exception.”

The Buffalo Bills and the K-Gun

When Marv Levy became the Buffalo Bills’ head coach in 1986, he already had tons of experience at just about every level of football. The Coe College graduate coached with his alma mater in the early 1950s and then moved on to New Mexico and Cal (where he hired a young assistant named Bill Walsh). After a four-year run as the head coach for William & Mary, Levy got his first NFL gig as a special teams coach for the Philadelphia Eagles and Washington Redskins and became the head coach of the CFL’s Montreal Alouettes in 1973. The Kansas City Chiefs came calling in 1978, and he was their head coach through the 1982 season, compiling a 31–42 record. Then, after a two-year hiatus and one season as the head coach of the USFL’s Chicago Blitz, Levy got the Buffalo job in November of 1986, replacing Hank Bullough. It was not a prestigious assignment at the time. Levy had been a TV analyst for the Bills’ preseason games and he took over a team that hadn’t been to the playoffs since 1981 and hadn’t won a postseason game since 1965, when they beat the San Diego Chargers for their second straight AFL title. 

The Bills had put talent together under general manager Bill Polian but hadn’t demonstrated it on the field yet. Polian hired Levy based on their history together in Kansas City and with Chicago, and Levy inherited a team with Jim Kelly at quarterback, Andre Reed at receiver, Bruce Smith at defensive end, and other stars who would be featured in later Super Bowl teams. Levy improved the Bills from 4–12 in that first season to 7–8 in the strike-shortened year of 1987 and lost the AFC Championship Game to the Cincinnati Bengals to end their 1988 season. In that game Levy was quite unhappy about the Bengals’ no-huddle tactics, and the NFL famously told Cincinnati head coach Sam Wyche before the game that if he tried to hurry things up too much as decreed by the officials, his team would be repeatedly penalized. But by the beginning of the 1989 season, Levy and the Bills were whistling the same tune.

When the Bills promoted Ted Marchibroda from quarterbacks coach to offensive coordinator before the 1989 season, they adopted the no-huddle offense and improved from 14
th
 and 12
th
 in points and yards in 1988 to third and fifth, respectively, in Marchibroda’s first season. From 1989 through 1993, Buffalo never ranked lower than seventh in any offensive category, appeared in four straight Super Bowls, and featured Kelly, Reed, and running back Thurman Thomas, a trio who would earn induction into the Hall of Fame. 

Marchibroda had been in the NFL since 1961 as a coach, and his base idea for the no-huddle—what was later called the “K-Gun” in Buffalo’s case—happened around that time. “I was driving to work with Bill McPeak and Abe Gibron, and somebody said, ‘One day, all the plays will be called at the line of scrimmage; there won’t be a huddle,’” Marchibroda told 
Newsday
 in 1991. “It all came together after 30 years. All the pieces of the puzzle fit. It’s a simple, sound, basic offense. It’s simple to call at the line of scrimmage. The verbiage is minimal. That’s one reason for our success. The defense doesn’t have much time to make its calls.”

According to Kelly, though, the process was rather complex for the quarterback. And it was better if, as it was for the Bills in that era, there was continuity in personnel from year to year. “Say it was second and 8,” Kelly told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 1992, “I’d hold a finger in the air, like a gun, so the sideline knew I wanted K-Gun personnel if it wasn’t already on the field. Then I’d look to see if [the defense] was subbing. If they weren’t, I’d yell, ‘Eight! Eight!’ Tight end right with one wideout and a slot receiver and split end to the left. Then I’d yell, ‘Cow! Cow!’ My hot read would be to the tight end side. Then I’d yell, ‘Ninety-three!’ Outside receivers would run 10-yard outs and inside receivers six to eight-yard option routes. Then I’d yell, ‘Louisville!’ The snap would be on three. Then I’d look over the defense. If I didn’t like what I saw, I’d audible at the line. I was so lucky because I had the smartest center in the world, Kent Hull, who could make every line call to account for [defensive] guys moving around, so I’d never have to worry about that. And I knew the tendencies of every one of my guys. I knew what worked. You think I’d have wanted to call my own plays with new guys to break in every year? No way.”

Sadly, the K-Gun Bills were lost a bit to the vagaries of history because history remembers the winners. And though Buffalo was the only NFL franchise to appear in four straight Super Bowls (1990–1993), it matters a lot less in the big picture when there are no rings to show for it. The Bills lost Super Bowl XXV to the New York Giants 20–19 after kicker Scott Norwood’s late field-goal attempt famously went wide right. Then, they lost 37–24 to the Redskins in Super Bowl XXVI, in which Kelly was sacked five times and threw four interceptions. The Bills’ last two Super Bowl losses were to the team that would become the true dynasty of the 1990s led by two coaches with defenses that were built to expose the limitations of every offense it faced.

The Bills’ first Super Bowl team may have been its best. In 1990 Buffalo ranked first in points scored and sixth in points allowed, finishing 13–3 in the regular season and thrashing the Los Angeles Raiders 51–3 in the AFC Championship Game. Kelly had Thomas in his backfield and Reed and James Lofton as his primary receiving targets. All four of those players are in the Hall of Fame. The K-Gun offense had the rest of the league on its proverbial heels, and it was up to Giants head coach Bill Parcells and defensive coordinator Bill Belichick to find a way to counter the most dynamic offense in the league.

Belichick’s strategy sounded crazy to his players. He theorized that it was perfectly acceptable to have Thomas run for more than 100 yards in the game (which Thomas did, gaining 115 yards and scoring a rushing touchdown on just 15 carries) while the real emphasis had to be on Buffalo’s quick passing game. “I thought it was a collective brain fart—like what the hell are you talking about?” linebacker Carl Banks told Giants.com. “We were a team that prided itself defensively on not giving up 100-yard rushers, not even giving up 100-yard games for a total offensive rush stat. But he said it, we are all in an uproar, and we’re thinking Bill is just conceding that Thurman is just this good of a football player that we won’t be able to stop him. And then he reeled us back in and kinda gave us a method to the madness.”

The Giants went with a two-man front for most of the game, alternating between five and six defensive backs years before nickel and dime defenses as base concepts were the norm. The method was clear—Belichick didn’t want Buffalo’s receivers to catch Kelly’s short passes and gain huge swaths of yardage after the catch while lining up in their signature no-huddle and exhausting New York’s defense. Instead, allowing Thomas to gain what he gained altered Buffalo’s strategy, and Belichick slow-rolled the Bills into doing exactly what the Giants wanted them to do. “I didn’t feel like we wanted to get into a game where they threw the ball 45 times,” Belichick told Giants.com years later. “I knew if they had some success running the ball, they would stay with it. And I always felt when we needed to stop the run, we could stop it. And the more times they ran it, it was just one less time they could get it to Reed or get it to Lofton or throw it to Thomas, who I thought was more dangerous as a receiver because there’s more space than there was when he was a runner.”

Super Bowl XXV is mostly known for Norwood’s missed field goal late in the game and the Giants’ mastery of the time of possession battle. They kept the ball for over 40 minutes in the game—but it’s Belichick’s defensive playbook that has a place in the Hall of Fame, along with all those Bills offensive players. It was also one of the first national indications that Belichick might have more on the ball than your average coach.

That was merely the first of Buffalo’s four Super Bowl nightmares. The Bills were trounced by Joe Gibbs’ Redskins at the end of the 1991 season and they then were poleaxed in two straight Super Bowls by a resurgent Dallas Cowboys team that brought new wrinkles to the old Tom Landry defensive line innovations.

Jimmy Johnson and the One-Gap 4-3 Defense

Jimmy Johnson has never lacked confidence in himself. He was confident when he was a hotshot high school football player in Port Arthur, Texas, teasing schoolmate Janis Joplin because she was “the beatnik who wore the black leotards.” He was confident when he was an undersized defensive tackle on Arkansas’ 1964 national championship team. He was confident when he became Oklahoma State’s head coach in 1979, he was confident when he replaced Howard Schnellenberger at Miami in 1984, and he was most certainly confident in 1989 when he replaced Tom Landry as the only head coach the Dallas Cowboys had ever had. 

Put simply, Johnson has always believed in his own greatness. And in a football sense, he has almost always been right. That was true in college, and Johnson’s schematic brilliance rooted in simplicity, execution, and controlled aggression transferred very well to the NFL.

The Dallas offense run under Johnson by Norv Turner and Ernie Zampese was very much an offshoot of the principles brought forth by Sid Gillman, Don Coryell, and Joe Gibbs. It was a vertical passing game in a three-digit system buttressed by a power running game and an outstanding offensive line. That was what made Johnson’s Cowboys go on that side of the ball. Led by the Triplets (Troy Aikman, Michael Irvin, and Emmitt Smith) and one of the best offensive lines in NFL history, it certainly did go.

But Johnson’s defensive mind-set was the real innovation behind his Super Bowl teams.

From the invention of the 4-3 defense in the 1950s, defensive linemen were generally trained to be two-gap defenders or to align head-to-head with blockers and deal with runners as they came to those gaps. Landry’s further innovation, the 4-3 Flex Defense, assigned some linemen to specific gaps instead, leaving them with better angles in pursuit. But it was Johnson’s insistence that the one-gap 4-3 front could be used to attack in a more prominent fashion. That defined Dallas’ defense and changed the way NFL teams used their fronts. “I began to wonder why defensive linemen were always coached to wait and read the offensive blocks before taking action,” Johnson wrote in his book, 
Turning the Thing Around
. “Why weren’t they attacking right from the snap? Why was defense so defensive? Why couldn’t defensive be offensive?”

Johnson began to implement his versions of the attack one- gap 4-3 defense through his time as an assistant coach in the 1970s. That path began in 1965, one year after Johnson, a defensive lineman, helped the Arkansas Razorbacks win the 1964 NCAA championship. Instead of opting for the pros, Johnson made his way as an assistant coach through Louisiana Tech, Picayune High School, Wichita State, Iowa State, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Pitt before he got his first head coaching job with the Oklahoma State Cowboys in 1979. Over the next five years, Johnson turned an inconsistent team into a powerhouse. He won a national championship with the Miami Hurricanes with that same defensive concept and better players in 1987.

His move to the NFL seemed ordained, and he took that defensive philosophy with him when that happened. “I believed, and still do, in creating upfield pressure from a 4-3 stack formation,” he wrote. “That is, four down linemen with three linebackers (true linebackers back off the line of scrimmage rather than hybrid ‘up ends’). Let the linebackers do the waiting and reading of blocks. Let the down linemen fire off the snap and charge upfield, creating havoc in the offense. Put simply, 
attack
 on defense. The traditionalists considered it tantamount to sending the defensive front on kamikaze missions, committing them too soon.”

Jimmy Johnson’s 4-3 stack formation

But Johnson had answers for that. He wanted his defensive linemen to be lighter and quicker, more easily able to define pursuit through the gap before it was erased by the blocker. Johnson’s ends looked like linebackers, his linebackers looked like big safeties, and it was their job to roam all around the field, catching whatever the line had missed. Beside and behind the linebackers, the secondary was more designed to avoid the big play than to be truly aggressive. It was the inverse principle of many defenses before it, which dictated that aggression would come from the linebackers and secondary, while the line would contain first and pursue second. 

More specifically, Johnson developed what we’ll call the “Attack 4-3” to ward off two issues: the fact that he wasn’t going to get the best high school recruits when coaching an Oklahoma State team that was still dealing with the effects of the sanctions that had been handed down when he took over in 1979 and the specter of the wishbone offense. Option football, like the wishbone, clowned the old head-on-head defenses for years, and Johnson had to find a way to deal with it. Committing his defenders too soon turned out to be the right answer. “We had a match for the wishbone,” Miami safety Bennie Blades told 
The Oklahoman
. “You need a lot of team speed, but the wishbone was based on teams not protecting their territory. If you weren’t disciplined in stopping first the fullback, then the quarterback, and the two options that he had, you were going to get beat 63–0. We just basically built a line at eight yards and, with the speed we had on defense, took away the first two options. Hey, I was right there. I think one game I had 10 tackles and another I had 16 tackles. We just beat them to the punch most of the time.”

The counter for Oklahoma head coach Barry Switzer was simple: when Johnson moved to Miami, his players outranked his Xs and Os. “He couldn’t beat us at OSU, and you know why? He didn’t have the players,” Switzer said. “It’s like I always told Jimmy, ‘When I had the players, I won. When you had the players, you won.’ It didn’t matter whether it was college ball or pro ball.”

The theory was tested again in 1989. The simplicity and speed that worked so well throughout Johnson’s collegiate coaching career would not go so smoothly against more talented and more complex NFL offenses, the story went. “The biggest thing was that when I was in college, I really concentrated on personnel,” Johnson told me in 2010. “That was my strength, and I was in essence my own recruiting coordinator. And when I went to the pros, I did the same thing. I handled the draft, I drafted the players, and I was able to get the personnel. The other thing was that when I was at the University of Miami, we ran a pro-style offense and defense. I started each year by going to a pro training camp, I visited with various pro coaches, and I did this for five years. I went to Cowboys camp, Raiders camp,
 
Atlanta Falcons camp, throughout the league. I visited a lot with John Robinson of the Los Angeles Rams at that time. And I think that really helped prepare me and my staff to go into pro football.”

As Johnson would say, he didn’t want a big slug who knocked people down. He demanded quick playmakers on his front. Johnson’s defensive tackles generally weighed around 275 pounds, while his rush ends tipped the scales at 245 or so. His primary front four in Dallas was very light—ends Tony Tolbert and Charles Haley weighed 265 and 245 pounds, respectively, and tackles Tony Casillas and Russell Maryland topped out at 275 pounds. While Dallas’ offensive line featured 300-pound-plus behemoths, Johnson’s defensive linemen worked off power and speed, and the back seven cleaned up any mess it missed.

The Cowboys were a complete mess when Jerry Jones bought them and Johnson took over the coaching duties in 1989, and Jones’ cavalier dismissal of Landry, the only coach the franchise had ever known, set him up as a villain. Dallas went 1–15 in 1989, but just three years later, the Cowboys’ scheme, motivation, and personnel had them facing the K-Gun Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII at the end of the 1992 season. There they faced a team that ranked third in points in the regular season and had cut a wide swath through the rest of the AFC’s best teams in the postseason, including the all-time comeback win that destroyed the Houston Oilers and put a pin in the Run-and-Shoot narrative.

The Super Bowl, though, was a laugher. The Cowboys won 52–17, Buffalo turned the ball over a Super Bowl-record nine times, and quarterback Jim Kelly was knocked out of the game on a blitz. Dallas’ defensive adjustments were near perfect after a few early hiccups (especially a switch from base defense to nickel on an early Buffalo goal-line stand), and Johnson’s defense was validated as the wave of the now. The 4-3 two-gap wait-and-see defense was officially a thing of the past. Johnson had constructed a perfect marriage of personnel and scheme, and that defense took it to the Bills again in Super Bowl XXVIII the next year, beating the AFC champs 30–13. Dallas might have continued winning Super Bowls under Johnson for years, but Jones insisted on taking credit for moves Johnson made. Johnson left Dallas after the 1993 season, had some success—but far less than he had in Dallas—with the Miami Dolphins from 1996 through 1999, and then turned to television analysis.

Still, his legacy as the man who brought defensive gap schemes—not just pass rush concepts but the entire way of thinking—for a four-man front is well-deserved.

Seattle Seahawks head coach Pete Carroll, designer of a 4-3 base defense responsible for two Super Bowl runs, was asked by the Dallas media in 2014 how his Seahawks teams line up to Johnson’s Cowboys era from a schematic and philosophical standpoint. Not surprisingly, Carroll was right in line with that idea. “Both of us come out of a defensive background, and I think we always cherished speed, toughness, and that style, and we built our football team in a mold of defense and special teams and running the football,” he said. “That’s not much of a difference away from that style that they put forth back in the day. You still need a great quarterback, you need a guy that can do all that, but I think there are some real similarities.” 

Zone Blocking: Alex Gibbs and the Origin of the Species

Throughout NFL history, blocking schemes changed and advanced as the need flourished due to the increasing complexity of enemy defenses. Through the NFL’s first half-century, most blocking was based on aligned and choreographed power. The Packer Sweep was the dominant blocking scheme of the 1960s at least in perception, but Vince Lombardi was also a big believer in what he called ‘option’ or ‘do-dad’ blocking, which was the most prominent forerunner to the league’s current zone blocking and zone/man blocking hybrid schemes. 

The godfather of true zone blocking in the NFL is unquestionably Alex Gibbs, who took the idea of option blocking to an entirely new level, but he definitely had his forbearers. When you hear that Gibbs invented zone blocking in the 1990s (a common canard), keep in mind that while he may have perfected his own (and thus the NFL’s) iterations of zone blocking he certainly didn’t invent it, and he’d be the first to tell you that. Lombardi’s case was different. He based the fundamentals of his offense on fundamentally sound blocking techniques, but it wasn’t just the power sweep that kept that offense going. Lombardi called it “area blocking” as opposed to zone blocking, but the principle was similar. And Lombardi used it for the same reasons that his followers used it—to keep the offensive line clean and consistent against changing and more complex defensive schemes. “Do-dad blocking is used against stunting lines or lines that stack one defender behind the other,” the coach explained in his seminal book, 
Lombardi on Football
. “In the case where the defensive tackle has the inside charge and the middle linebacker is keying the fullback and has the outside responsibility, the middle linebacker will with the snap of the ball move immediately to the hole, making it impossible for the center to cut him down because of the middle linebacker’s key on the fullback. In this case, we will use do-dad blocking.

“The center is the lead blocker—the apex. He will lead step, the same technique as for the down block, for the [lower body] of the defensive tackle. The offensive guard, using the same technique as he does in the drive block, will aim for a point which is outside the defensive tackle. If the defensive tackle has an inside charge, the guard immediately releases the tackle, picking up the middle linebacker who would be moving with the key of the fullback toward the hole. The center, since the tackle is moving into him, would pick him off.”

Vince Lombardi’s area blocking scheme

The central constructs of zone blocking are solving the problem of stunting and blitzing defenders—really, solving the problem of any sort of personnel advantage on that side of the ball—with a flexible system based on precise coordination as much as sheer physical strength. Lombardi was the main force in bringing that concept into the NFL, but Gibbs would perfect it years later.

Gibbs learned a lot of things from a lot of different people and married them together to create his own unusual but eminently successful approach. During his time at Ohio State from 1975 through 1978, he learned the basics of successful teaching from Woody Hayes—not the crazed coach everyone now remembers, but the freshman English teacher. Hayes had just as much expertise with the language arts as he did with the game. Gibbs learned about dealing with players and maximizing their potential from Bobby Bowden during their time together at West Virginia in 1973 and 1974. Georgia coach Vince Dooley taught him the value of organization during his time there in 1982 and 1983. By the time Gibbs became the Denver Broncos’ offensive line coach in 1984, he not only had his blocking system together, but he also had a concrete way of making people understand and execute what he wanted. 

Gibbs ran elevated versions of the inside zone and outside zone throughout his career. Zone blocking at any level requires linemen to first determine whether they are covered or uncovered and then help the man next to them if they’re not. It’s a roughneck ballet at 100 miles per hour with all kinds of checks and responsibilities. The strength comes in the group and it starts from the inside. “When I coach the center, I tell him that if he is not tough enough to block the nose guard, he is not tough enough to block for me,” Gibbs said at one coaching clinic. “If the nose guard is close to the center, the center has him. If he is close to the guard, the guard calls the center into the combination. The nose guard may make the play, but if the center can flatten the defender out of the line of scrimmage, we can be successful.”

Perhaps the most impressive distillation of that plan came in Super Bowl XXXII, when Gibbs’ Broncos upset the Packers 31–24 behind the MVP performance of Terrell Davis. The running back overcame a severe migraine to rush for 157 yards and three touchdowns, but it was Gibbs’ line—without a 300 pounder in the bunch—that negated 350-pound tackle Brown and held left end Reggie White, perhaps the greatest defensive end in NFL history, without a sack. White put up three sacks in Green Bay’s Super Bowl XXXI win against the New England Patriots the year before, but the Broncos—primarily right tackle Tony Jones—kept him quiet, and the Denver blocking plan is worth reviewing. 

So it went through the line, and Brown found himself winded while White was negated by Jones, who played the game of his career. John Elway grabbing his first Super Bowl win was the lead story, and Davis’ strength to overcome a migraine in the game was a marvelous ancillary tale, but it was the guys upfront who defined that win while being led by their at times intractible line coach. “He’s got the ability to be tough and demanding, but he cares about his players and he looks after them, which gives him the ability to be extra tough and extra demanding because the players know he cares about them,” then-Broncos head coach Mike Shanahan said in 2000. “And there’s a fine line right there. There are so many coaches who wind up being buddy/buddy with a player, but they can’t be tough on their guys because they get too close to them. Alex has been a guy who is as demanding a person as any I’ve been around, but he knows how to put his arm around people and let them know he cares about them. It takes a unique guy to be able to do that.”

Of course, as Gibbs might himself say, none of that happy horseshit matters if you don’t have a plan. And the plan must be based around the right kind of personnel. “[Finding his ideal sort of lineman] is a very hard thing to do because IQ is not what I’m talking about,” Gibbs told 
The Denver Post
. “Test scores are not what I’m talking about. It’s communication skills, the ability to come in each week and change things, and talk a different language, and make quick decisions, and solve problems. That’s a smart player to me. I don’t look at that like other people do. I look for the smart guys because that is as important to me…almost as important to me as skill. You have to have guys that can put the fires out real fast.”

Alex Gibbs’ inside zone blocking scheme

Gibbs didn’t just coach his line. He also took charge of the backs in his overall philosophy because if the backs weren’t reading zone the right way, nothing else mattered. What he coached—and what lasts in today’s NFL—is the inside (or tight) zone and the outside (or wide) zone. In inside zone the blockers are directed to push their blocks to the gaps nearest to them, and the back is directed to read the gaps (either play-side or back-side). In outside zone blockers await the defenders who appear in their gaps, and the back takes the outside gap, whichever one opens up. Gibbs saw a defense as a collection of seven men to block with an eighth man as the potential tipping point. When there are nine men to block, as Gibbs has always said, that’s when it’s time to scrap the gameplan and throw the damned ball. “The tough thing about the Broncos’ running game is the way they block,” New York Giants linebacker Carlos Emmons said. “The way they block as a unit, if one defensive guy misses a gap, you’re dead.”

Alex Gibbs’ outside zone blocking scheme

When Gibbs joined the Atlanta Falcons’ staff as an assistant head coach/offensive line coach/consultant in 2004, he was dealing with a different kind of quarterback and new personnel overall. Quarterback Michael Vick was perhaps the most athletic player at his position in NFL history, and the backfield of Warrick Dunn and T.J. Duckett combined with Vick to produce a rushing attack that led the league all three years that Gibbs was in charge of the line. “I steal everything I’ve ever used,” Gibbs said. “I’ve never invented anything. I’ve never developed a play. I’ve never developed an offense. I’ve stolen everything I’ve gotten from players and coaches and film. Everything. I have never, ever invented a thing. All I do that’s a little special is I teach different than other people teach. And that’s what we are. We’re teachers. And people lose perspective of that. I’m not as good with gameplans as a lot of guys. I’m not as good with strategy as a lot of guys. But I’m real good at teaching.”

The Greatest Show on Turf

Dick Vermeil retired as the Philadelphia Eagles’ head coach after the 1982 season, citing burnout. Football, the game he loved, had taken too much of a toll. He stayed away for 15 seasons and, when he returned to become the St. Louis Rams’ head coach in 1997, many wondered why he bothered. The Rams hadn’t had a winning season since 1989 and they’d never had one in St. Louis, where the franchise moved from Los Angeles in 1994. The quarterback, Tony Banks, was a developmental player who never developed. The running back, Lawrence Phillips, was a problem child who would soon find himself out of the league and in prison. Isaac Bruce was a young receiver with a lot of potential but very little around him. 

Vermeil suffered through two seasons in which his Rams won a combined nine games. Then, in three fell swoops, the coach and the team put together the offense that would shock the world. There was the trade for Indianapolis Colts running back Marshall Faulk before the 1999 draft, giving up second and fifth-round picks for a back who would ride his new team’s offense to a Hall of Fame induction. The Rams signed free-agent quarterback Trent Green to a four-year, $17.5 million contract in February of 1999, and the thought was that Green would be the future of the franchise at that position. But the Rams had also taken a flyer on a former Green Bay Packers camp body quarterback named Kurt Warner, and it was Warner who took over when Green suffered a knee injury in the 1999 preseason.

The real key to St. Louis’ offensive turnaround, though, happened in a Mobile, Alabama, hotel room in January of 1999. There, during the Senior Bowl, Vermeil interviewed Mike Martz as a potential offensive coordinator. And it was Martz who would show Vermeil, the Rams, and the rest of the NFL the next wave in the philosophy of the vertical passing game. As a kid in San Diego, Martz had watched Sid Gillman coach the Chargers and he had a bright set of ideas as to how to merge Gillman’s version of the West Coast Offense with the more standard and popular version set forth by Bill Walsh in the 1970s and beyond. “He is bright, extremely bright,” said Vermeil while describing Martz to ESPN.com. “He has a great natural feel for the game and a great feel for the players and what they can and what they can’t do. I think he has an even greater feel when he analyzes a defense and what they do not do well and how to go about attacking them at their weakest points. He can exploit a defensive football team. The other thing is he’s a courageous play-caller. He can scare you to death when you’re on the other end of the headset. Once you get used to his aggressive approach and working with him as a team, I don’t think there’s any better.”

Martz wasn’t about balance in the traditional sense. He frequently put his quarterbacks in more peril than other coaches by refusing to cede blocking roles to tight ends. And though the Rams used a fair set of three to five-step drops in their passing game, the time taken by receivers to run deeper routes meant that Warner would be providing his own protection to a point. The Martz offense has been a recipe for implosion when employed by less aware quarterbacks, but Warner had an innate sense of timing in the pocket and the perfect physical gifts to make this offense go. 

Adding Faulk in the trade with the Colts was the other keystone in what would become the first truly explosive offense of the new millennium. Faulk was a perfect back for the mixture of the two West Coast Offenses. Not only was he a powerful, fast, and shifty back, but he could also catch passes from anywhere in the formation, block adeptly when asked, and perfectly grasp the offense. From 1999 through 2001, Faulk put together one of the most impressive timelines of sustained excellence for any back in NFL history. In 1999 he became the second back to gain more than 1,000 yards rushing and 1,000 yards receiving in the same season. He neither ran for fewer than 1,359 yards in any of those seasons nor totaled less than 765 receiving yards. As it was for Gillman’s and Don Coryell’s offenses, those allegedly high-flying offenses with very little in the way of a running game, total balance was actually the key. 

However, like his hero Gillman, Martz saw no intrinsic reason for the run to set up the pass—he wanted to be aggressive from the opening play of the opening drive and force defenses to make them let up. With the Washington Redskins, Martz had head coach Norv Turner tell him that he liked the third-down stuff he had installed but wondered why the Redskins couldn’t put that more aggressive mind-set to work on early downs. That was Martz’s epiphany, and he was able to convince the far more 
traditionally-minded Vermeil that the Rams had the personnel and vision to make it work. Vermeil did some data crunching with the help of the Elias Sports Bureau and discovered that such aggressiveness could be rewarded. “We looked at every team in the NFL,” Vermeil told 
Sports Illustrated
 in 2000, “and we found that the best offenses in the league last year, Denver and Minnesota, actually threw the ball much more in the first quarter than they ran.”

Vermeil told Martz to go run his offense, and the effect on the rest of the league was instant. The Rams ranked 24
th
 in points and 27
th
 in yards in 1998; they ranked first in points and yards in each of the next three seasons. Vermeil retired after the Rams won Super Bowl XXXIV at the end of the 1999 season—a decision he has regretted since—and the team started to lose its personnel touch, but through those three years, the offense Martz designed and implemented was as tough to stop as any in NFL history.

Martz’s offense had its antecedents, but at its most effective, it was an interesting hybrid of stuff. He employed the base three-digit system used by everyone from Gillman to Coryell to Joe Gibbs, but he added a lot of different route options for Faulk and an elevated percentage and awareness of option routes for his receivers. Martz had little nuanced changes in route concepts for his receivers based on the coverage—slide your route under against retreat zone coverage, flare it out against retreat man, adjust based on the defender’s movements against aggressive press coverage, and so on. Martz’s system thusly combined the vertical offense of Gillman and Coryell with the running back-friendly concepts favored by Walsh and the elevated option routes of the Run-and-Shoot. The idea at its apex was to have as many as five potentially open targets on any given play by extending splits and routes beyond the breaking point of any defense. 

Everyone was tasked to make it succeed, but the pressure it put on Warner was staggering. Not only did Warner have to master the playbook and attune his own mechanics to this system, but he also had to time his acuity to the various options. And when it came to quarterbacks, Martz could be a fairly daunting taskmaster. When it came to offensive lines and protections, Martz seemed to be less so, which tended to result in a fairly short run for his signal-callers. “I can’t blame it all on personnel,” Faulk said in 2010. “It’s up to what you want to do and what you want to get accomplished, and that’s about the quarterback…If you hold on to the football, you are going to get hit in the NFL. In that offense you need to let it go because there’s always an opportunity…a hot read of some sort. You can get rid of it, but some guys just hold on.”

Warner was up to the challenge until injuries started to take their toll; he was gone from the team by 2004. Faulk retired after the 2005 season, but, effectively, his time as a top-tier back ended in 2002. There were no clear replacements for anyone—Warner, Faulk, all-time left tackle Orlando Pace, Bruce, Torry Holt—who made that offense go. Martz, too, would move on to systems with less talent, and it would take its toll on him and his players. The Greatest Show on Turf Rams had a brief time in the spotlight, but their era truly ended when they went up against the underdog New England Patriots in Super Bowl XXXVI. 

The Belichick Hybrid Defenses

After Jimmy Johnson made the one-gap attack defense 
de rigueur
, it stood to reason that another man would take one-gap and two-gap concepts and marry them successfully on the same 
front. And that man was Bill Belichick. By the time Belichick made 
his way to Foxboro, Massachusetts, as the New England Patriots’ head coach in 2000, he had both learned and taught a lot about defense. Belichick’s father Steve, an assistant head football coach and longtime scout at the U.S. Naval Academy, was regarded in his time as one of the best personnel evaluators at any level of football and was his son’s greatest influence in that regard. 

From a coaching perspective, though, Belichick probably learned more from Bill Parcells than from anyone else. Parcells replaced Ray Perkins, who hired Belichick as a special teams coach and defensive assistant in 1979. Belichick became Parcells’ defensive coordinator in 1985, and the New York Giants won two Super Bowls with Parcells and Belichick running the defense and outside linebacker Lawrence Taylor wreaking havoc on every offense he faced. When Belichick took over the defense, he devised new ways for Taylor to beat the constant double teams he faced, and Taylor responded with 20.5 sacks in 1986, the first of the Giants’ two Super Bowl seasons under the Parcells/Belichick brain trust. Both men had a hand in making Taylor the first true outside linebacker pass rusher in a 3-4 base defense, and while the Giants had other defenders who sported their own Hall of Fame credentials, Taylor was Belichick’s first stab at the concept of a hybrid defender—and a hybrid defense.

Belichick would take that strategy to Cleveland in 1991 as the Browns’ head coach, but between his own inflexibility, a lack of equitable personnel, and the franchise’s move after the 1995 season to Baltimore, the whole thing seemed ill-fated from the start. Fired in February of 1996, he re-joined Parcells—first in New England and then with the New York Jets. The original plan was for Belichick to succeed Parcells as Jets head coach, but a last-minute change of heart on Belichick’s part had him instead taking over the Patriots. In that first year, Belichick tore apart a roster that was old, ineffective, and overpaid but had some good starters on the defensive side, including safety Lawyer Milloy, linebacker Tedy Bruschi, defensive end Willie McGinest, and cornerback Ty Law, and it was up to Belichick to maximize the pieces he had and add to the mix in his own way. 

This time he had learned enough to understand how to take a team and remake it in his own image. The Patriots went 5–11 in his first season but rebounded nicely in 2001, going 11–5 in the regular season and working their way through the playoffs to face the St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXVI. Belichick’s team was a severe underdog; few knew how well they could play just yet. Quarterback Tom Brady was a first-year starter, and the Rams were at the peak of their “Greatest Show on Turf” efficiency.

Belichick’s strategy in that game wasn’t simple, but it was decidedly old-school—the Patriots would smack St. Louis’ playmakers in the mouth over and over before those beautiful routes could develop. They played the Rams’ receivers, including running back Marshall Faulk, much tighter and more aggressively than other defenses did and wore them out with this physical approach. The strategy, which helped the Pats beat the Rams 20–17, was rooted in the previous matchup between the teams during the regular season.

The Rams only scored 24 points in that regular-season game. “But I never really felt like we had control of the game,” Belichick recalled in 
The Games That Changed the Game
. “It seemed like every time they needed a pass, they hit one. We thought going in that night we couldn’t just let St. Louis settle in and throw. We wanted to get them out of their rhythm, put pressure on [Kurt] Warner, force incomplete passes. So, we blitzed—a lot.”

By Belichick’s count, the Patriots blitzed the Rams 43 times in the earlier game, but Warner did a great job of adjusting to those pressures, using quicker passes, and the Rams’ line turned in a tremendous effort. In the Super Bowl, the strategy was different. New England barely blitzed at all, instead coming with a wide array of coverage looks and prioritizing that Faulk must be neutralized at all costs. They focused on jamming the receivers and Faulk at the line of scrimmage with just enough pressure to further disrupt the timing of the Martz/Warner passing game. It worked for the most part and served as one of the first famous examples of Belichick’s discovery that it is far more important to tailor your system to your opponent than to move into every game with a static set of schemes that are easier to counter.

The only constant in Belichick’s defensive strategy has been change, and that change has been defined in part by the 
Moneyball
 principle, which states that you will derive more value from your roster if you figure out different ways to utilize undervalued assets. In Belichick’s case those assets were players who worked better in, say, the 3-4 when fewer teams were running it. Belichick optimized his early Patriots rosters around players who were on the outside looking in from a schematic sense.
 
“When we put in the 3-4 in 2000–01, there were three teams running it,” Belichick told Comcast SportsNet New England in late December of 2014. “So, if you wanted a nose tackle, there were plenty of them out there. If you wanted a 3-4 outside linebacker, there were plenty of them out there. Guys like—[Rosevelt] Colvin was a good example at Chicago, or even [Mike] Vrabel, those 3-4 outside linebackers, but there’s nowhere to go. New England was a good option for both of them because the guys Mike was playing behind [in Pittsburgh with a more traditional 3-4 defense]. Rosie was trying to play a 4-3 walked-off-the-line linebacker to a defensive end in sub situations. But it wasn’t really a clean fit for him. So he had a much cleaner fit in the 3-4.”

When the 3-4 craze came back in the 2000s (brought about to a large degree because of New England’s success with it), Belichick zigged as everyone else was zagging and transitioned to a 4-3 look. “You look back five, six years ago and you’ve got 16, 17, 18 teams playing 3-4,” he said. “You go to the draft board and think, 
Here’s a nose tackle. Who needs a nose tackle?
 Well, eight teams in front of you need a nose tackle, and there’s two nose tackles. It’s something you have to figure out where you can get the players to play in your system. Sometimes you just can’t get them, so either you have to change your system or modify it or play with lesser players if you want to maintain the system. That’s definitely a challenging part of it—keeping up with that, trying to stay at least even with it. Hopefully ahead of it, but at least even, but it’s a lot easier said than done.”

Belichick’s primary gambit to stay ahead of the game was to redefine the gap principles of the defensive line. Before he started tinkering with his fronts, defensive linemen were generally one-gappers or two-gappers. They either held the point so other defenders could flow through (two-gappers), or they attacked right off the snap, intending to create chaos (one-gappers). Teams would generally define their lines around one or the other, but Belichick decided that the best way to optimize his talent was to mix the two in hybrid form. This had been done to a degree in other ways—Pete Carroll always preferred a 4-3 over/under defense with a hybrid linebacker, and Wade Phillips liked to use a 5-2 base look, in which his players are actually one-gapping in a traditional two-gap format—but Belichick took it to another level by redefining the idea of the “one-or-the-other” player. 

Bill Belichick’s hybrid defensive front

In Belichick’s new hybrid fronts, an over concept might assign the nose tackle and strong-side ends two-gap responsibilities, leading to potential blitz possibilities to that side. On the weak side, the three-technique tackle and rush end might be one-gapping and attacking, leaving the front with the best of all possible worlds. Belichick could define his fronts by the mismatches they would potentially create because he wasn’t stuck with one philosophy or the other.

In an under, hybrid concept, the numbers favor the weak side, and the players might shift their responsibilities. These weren’t the high-flying multi-front defenses brought by Dick LeBeau and Dom Capers with the Pittsburgh Steelers. It was more of a stream of simple concepts strung together in ways nobody had seen before. “We can switch up and give you all kinds of different looks,” McGinest told the 
Orange County Register
 in 2004 just before New England beat the Carolina Panthers 32–29 in Super Bowl XXXVIII. “They might think I’m coming, but I’m actually dropping back into coverage. Or it might be [linebacker Tedy Bruschi] who’s coming, and I’m doing something else. I like it. It makes the games enjoyable.”

“You have to be flexible enough to learn when you play on this team,” Bruschi said in 2004. “I’d been a defensive lineman all my life, and when I got here, they asked me to drop back and used some terminology I’d never heard before. I had to ask an assistant, ‘What’s that?’”

And “that” was the whole point. If Belichick’s players had to come to terms with their terminology and their place in the defense, imagine how confusing it would be for their opponents? By delving into the college ranks, Belichick would further lead the revolution into the next millennium.

