# Section 13

---



9. The NFL’s Future: The Genius of Adaptation

“Many before have hailed the end of history; none have ever been right.”

—author Jonathan Wilson

The f
inal chapter of this book begins with the final words in Mr. Wilson’s outstanding book, 
Inverting the Pyramid,
 because the history of soccer tactics helped inspire 
The Genius of Desperation.
 Professional American football has been a tough sport to accurately and chronologically chronicle. The quarter­back sack only became a statistic in 1982, and the advanced metrics that came to baseball in the 1970s with Bill James and his acolytes have only really touched the NFL over the last decade. Things like defensive hits, hurries, and coverage numbers beyond interceptions and pass deflections are available to the public but are generally limited to the charting staffs of NFL teams or subscription services whose systems are not standardized. The schemes that have defined the game over the decades are generally attributed to more than one person—or not at all. I wanted to bring an order of time to the game’s schematic innovations and uncover some of the brilliant men who have forwarded them. 

Looking to the future, there are a few things we can deduce for certain. More than one NFL coach and general manager has told me that the modern NFL is more a matchup league than ever before, and what they generally mean by that is that there are far fewer static positions and more players who can fill multiple hybrid positions with their specific attributes. The theory is that when you align the scheme to the player, as opposed to the other way around, you have players more attuned to their responsibilities—and schemes that are more versatile based on the skills of your players. 

The linebacker position, for example, has changed drastically over the last decade. Although Tampa-2 schemes, requiring a middle linebacker who could drop into coverage, used to be 
de rigueur
, the NFL’s modern defenses have smaller, faster linebackers inside and outside for the most part. Your old-school thumpers are run specialists at best; now, the advent of three and four-receiver base offenses require linebackers who can retreat into zone and man coverage as if they were safeties. 

In some cases those linebackers once were safeties, and their positional responsibilities have changed to adjust to the modern passing game. The Tampa Bay Buccaneers selected Alabama safety Mark Barron with the seventh overall pick in the 2012 draft
. Barron was limited as a traditional strong safety both in run defense and pass coverage, but the then-St. Louis and now Los Angeles Rams saw the potential for something else. They traded for Barron in October of 2014, and when speed linebacker Alec Ogletree suffered an injury in 2015, defensive coordinator Gregg Williams took the 6
’
1
”
, 213-pound Barron and made him a linebacker in space. Having Barron at the second level of the defense allowed Williams to put different looks on the field, especially in his frequent dime packages. 

The Arizona Cardinals made a similar choice in Washington State safety Deone Bucannon, who was selected with the 27
th
 overall pick in the 2014 draft. Bucannon was a rangy pass-defending safety who could run up and hit at the line of scrimmage, but the Cardinals had other ideas for him. Bucannon played strong safety in all but one of 18 games in his rookie campaign—he started at free safety against the San Francisco 49ers in Week 3—but with so much depth at the safety position and a clear need for a hit-and-cover linebacker as Daryl Washington remained on indefinite suspension for various off-field incidents, head coach Bruce Arians and defensive coordinator James Bettcher decided to make Bucannon an inside linebacker, for all intents and purposes.

Thus, Bucannon became the only 210-pound inside linebacker in the NFL and a valuable force inside. He’s learned to deal with rushing gaps and expanded his repertoire as a box player while maintaining his ability to cover. The Cardinals referred to him as their “Moneybacker” in their dime-based defense, and he’s listed as an $LB on the team’s depth chart. After he amassed 11 tackles and returned an interception for a 39-yard touchdown against the Philadelphia Eagles in Week 15 of the 2015 season, he was named the NFC Defensive Player of the Week. Not bad for a guy who would have stuck at strong safety and left it right there for a lot of teams. “Deone was one of those guys that was a tall, active safety we needed to match up on tight ends and running backs,” Arians said in late 2015. “We lost Daryl Washington, so there was a void up front. We put him in the nickel package, and he really took off. He was too good to take off the field, so we basically kept our nickel package in and adjusted it to play against regular [personnel]. It’s always been that way and it goes back to when I was a head coach at Temple. We’d recruit skinny defensive ends, hoping they’d grow into tackles. Outside linebackers would grow into defensive ends, and safeties that would grow into outside linebackers. It’s one of those things that…the more position-flexibility you have, the more valuable you are to us.”

I mentioned to Arians that this was the same philosophy Jimmy Johnson used to build the great Dallas Cowboys defenses of the early 1990s—take smaller, faster guys and make them bigger and faster—and he laughed. “Yeah, Jimmy and I grew up around the same time, so it’s pretty similar,” he said.

At the 2017 Scouting Combine, Cardinals general manager Steve Keim said that this hybrid philosophy worked at several position groups on Arizona’s roster. “It’s important to have hybrid players at all levels whether it is your defensive line, your linebacker, or secondary. Because when you do things like we do—multiple fronts, multiple coverages—you have that position flexibility where you can play inside, you can play outside. You’ve got Deone from a matchup standpoint who can potentially cover tight ends, can cover at times slot receivers to an extent. To have a guy like Tyrann Mathieu who can invert, play in the slot, play in the nickel for you, the more flexibility you have, the more you can do. Those guys have become so valuable because this game has become a matchup situation.”

Selected in the third round of the 2013 draft, Mathieu became Arizona’s Swiss army knife in the secondary, playing effectively everywhere from outside cornerback to free and strong safety. The Cardinals have a very specific philosophy regarding positional versatility, but they’re hardly the only team doing so. You can expect that to continue. NFL teams select receivers and cornerbacks—and will continue to—specifically for their ability in the slot. Slot cornerback and slot receiver are positions that were relative afterthoughts a decade ago, but in today’s NFL, they’re starter positions.

In a larger sense, we can point to the idea that more than ever those coaches and play-designers and executives, who stay ahead of the curve by adapting to their environments and realities, are the ones who will find consistent success. Bill Belichick is the obvious iteration of this idea, but there were two contrasting ideologies I saw in Week 16 of the 2015 season that point to the NFL’s primary requirement these days: adapt or find yourself on the outside looking in.

In the second half and overtime of the Denver Broncos’ Monday night win against the Cincinnati Bengals that ended that Week 16, head coach Gary Kubiak surprised me. Throughout his long career as an offensive coordinator and head coach in the NFL, Kubiak stuck with a few basic offensive concepts: the inside and outside zone running game, multiple tight ends deployed as route-runners, and a passing game that’s built off of play-action and boot-action as much as any in the league. At times he had tied himself to his schemes to a fault. (I’ve talked to players around the league about the predictability of Kubiak’s passing concepts and how easy they are to read and react to.)

With Peyton Manning as his quarterback, Kubiak stubbornly stuck to his ideas in the face of clear evidence that Manning worked better in other schemes. It’s not that Manning’s clear regression was exactly Kubiak’s fault—there are a host of reasons for that—but this seemed like yet another example of Kubiak’s insistence that his players fit his concepts, no matter what. And that’s generally a recipe for disaster unless the players happen to fit what the coach wants.

But down 14–3 to the Bengals at halftime, Kubiak did adapt to the benefit of quarterback Brock Osweiler. His late-game offense increased the tempo, allowed Osweiler to react to what he saw on the field, forced Cincinnati’s defense into its base formations, and exhausted the Bengals’ defense with a higher play volume. The Broncos had 63 total plays in the game, but 47 came in the second half and in overtime. Denver gained just 89 yards in the first half and finished with 390 for the game.

Similarly, Broncos then-defensive coordinator Wade Phillips veered away from his first-half strategy of playing his cornerbacks in aggressive man coverages and used more zone concepts in the second half. Bengals receiver A.J. Green was toasting Denver’s excellent cornerbacks just as Pittsburgh Steelers wideout Antonio Brown had the week before. But after Phillips’ adjustments, everything changed. Backup quarterback A.J. McCarron was more flustered by the zone concepts, and his deep throws started to wane. After the game McCarron admitted that the errant snap exchange that sealed Denver’s win in overtime was due to his need to scan the protection a bit too long. Cincinnati gained 204 yards in the first half and only 90 yards thereafter.

Denver’s adjustments made all the difference. “It’s something we felt like we needed to do because we had no possessions,” Kubiak said about the decision to adjust the tempo. “In the first half, we had three. I don’t know if I’ve ever been a part of that. We had to do something to create some tempo and some plays before the day is over. You’ve got to sit there and say, ‘Okay, we had 16 snaps.’ We were well on our way to about 40 in there for a while. We had to do what we had to do.”

NFL coaches have to adjust and adapt. Any coach who tells you that it’s all about execution, and his players just need to play better…well, he’s either lying to himself or lying to you and he probably isn’t long for the job.

Fired by the Philadelphia Eagles after the 2015 season, Chip Kelly was famous for throwing a similar line out there. Whenever opponents are saying publicly that they have your system figured out before the plays happen, as was happening to the Eagles early that season, that’s big trouble. In Kelly’s three NFL seasons, he hadn’t expanded his palette enough, and the league caught up to him. It always does. When Kelly was taken out of his own tendencies and was instead asked to present a system that could defeat NFL defenses past their initial adjustments, it didn’t work. It didn’t work any better when the San Francisco 49ers hired Kelly in the 2016 season and relieved him of his duties after just one season. “You know when a team is in Tampa-2 [coverage], they’re going to slant their 3 and 7 technique [defensive linemen],” Kelly told Philly.com in September of 2015 after Josh Huff, one of his own receivers, claimed that Cowboys defenders were calling out plays before the Eagles ran them. “When they do it, it’s not a surprise to us. Everybody has predictabilities and tendencies going into every game. That’s just part of the game. Everybody kind of does what they do…We need to execute.”

Part of the problem in Philadelphia was that with Kelly’s breakneck tempo, the quarterback didn’t have time to call audibles. Basically, he would head to the line, read what he saw as well as he could, and the offense would have to hope for the best. If the pace didn’t break the defense, that strategy would collapse in on itself and eventually it did for Kelly.

Head coach Mike McCarthy has presided over a passing game in Green Bay that had relied too much on the superhuman efforts of Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers for years. Generally, McCarthy and his staff would prefer to run a bunch of isolation routes over and over without presenting Rodgers with better openings instead of “scheming guys open” in NFL parlance. But if you ask the coach about the system, he’ll point back to the players. “The reality is: we’re not that far off,” McCarthy said the day after Rodgers completed 22-of-43 passes for 202 yards, one touchdown, and one interception against the Chicago Bears in a 17–13 Thanksgiving night loss in 2015. “It’s the attention and the details. Our issues are technique and discipline in the technique, and quit worrying so much about the plays. Just win the route or win the play called.”

McCarthy has uttered several different iterations of this over the years. Green Bay’s offensive inflexibility really came home to roost when Rodgers missed several weeks in the 2017 season with a broken collarbone. The Packers lost eight of their last 11 games and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2008. Backup Brett Hundley, a mobile quarterback with a limited ability to read the field and digest more advanced passing concepts, was hung out to dry as Green Bay’s coaching staff was slow to adjust their offense to fit what Hundley could likely do—succeed marginally with run-pass options and routes that provided easy first reads. 

Systems come and go. Belichick has become the foremost and most successful proponent of the philosophy that you don’t go into a game or a season with a definitive system or scheme—instead you design and vary your concepts to best meet your opponent. That’s why you’ve seen the Patriots run everything from pure inside power runs to three-tight end sets as a base package to spread sets with a tight end flexed out on offense, and it’s why the Pats tend to switch from a 4–3 to a 3–4 as a base defensive concept every few years. It not only throws a different wrinkle into the gameplan, but also keeps them ahead of the NFL’s trends to produce a corresponding personnel advantage.

And just to keep everyone guessing, Belichick will throw a new wrinkle in there now and again. Although most coaches preach the importance of continuity along the offensive line, Belichick and his coaching staff have been known to put different line combinations on the field not only for each game, but also for each 
drive
. These things don’t always work, but they are examples of one coach’s need to stretch past the constraints of any one system at any time.

The RPO and Super Bowl LII

Ohio State (and former Utah and Florida) head coach Urban Meyer told 
Mike Kuchar of X & O Labs
 that by 2014 the run-pass option would take over college football as more and more teams used RPOs as a base strategy in their offense. That’s proven to be true. At the high school and college levels, the RPO has become a base construct of offenses all over the country. It’s an excellent advantage to be gained when you’re dealing with high player turnover and relatively limited time with your players on the practice field and in the film room.

In a nutshell the RPO allows the quarterback to adjust his strategy after the snap based on the movement of an unblocked defender. There’s an element of read-option here, but the RPO allows for more diverse passing concepts than the simple short stuff found in most basic option offenses. It also works for quarterbacks who aren’t mobile, which makes it more of a multiple passing concept than the standard read-option. The idea is not for the quarterback to take off running; it’s to give him the flexibility to pass or run based on the scope of the defense.

NFL teams started using RPOs more and more in recent years; a
ccording to Pro Football Focus
, the average NFL game had about five such plays in 2016, and that number went up, as did the awareness of the concept at the NFL level, when the Philadelphia Eagles implemented it with backup quarterback Nick Foles, who became the starter after Carson Wentz suffered a torn ACL against the Los Angeles Rams in the 13
th
 game of the 2017 season. Wentz had become the epicenter of Philly’s offense in only his second NFL season because of his ability to combine precision passing with toughness and mobility, and the injury would have felled a team with a less creative coaching staff. 

Instead, head coach Doug Pederson, offensive coordinator Frank Reich, and quarterbacks coach John DeFilippo turned to Foles and gave him the RPO as an easy way to get what were essentially free yards against defenses who couldn’t help but guess wrong. “I just think the RPO game is a unique way to put stress on different defenders,” Reich told me in the week leading up to Super Bowl LII. “Usually, the stress you’re trying to put on a defender [at the line of scrimmage] is to push them around. In the RPO game, sometimes that involves not blocking a defender and putting stress on him, like, ‘Why is no one blocking me? What am I supposed to do? Should I run after the ball carrier or should I stand here and try to guard the receiver who’s coming into this area?’ That’s some of the uniqueness of the RPO game, and when you get a quarterback who can read that unblocked defender quickly and deliver the ball with accuracy at different arm angles, it can be a very dangerous weapon.”

Foles isn’t as dynamic or mobile as Wentz nor does he have his arm or accuracy, but the RPO—and the threat of it—helped him exponentially. The Eagles may have only run it a few times per game, but they ran the concepts so well as an integration to their base offenses that opponents never really knew what to focus on. “It’s a run, but it’s also a pass if the quarterback decides to throw it and read it,” New England Patriots safety Devin McCourty told me. “Very tough defensively because every guy has a job and a role on our defense, and you have to do that. If you play the run when you’re supposed to be playing the pass and they throw it, that’s going to be a big gain. If you play the pass and they run it, that hurts you, too. We can’t have guys doing things that don’t fit the defense.”

What makes the RPO potentially more long-lasting in the NFL is the stress it puts on defenders on every play—and the levels to which it can be implemented. This isn’t a three-play Wildcat that defenses were able to figure out in half a season or a basic read-option that can be countered with spying linebackers. The RPO concepts may not be advanced enough to be a base offense in the pros, but as an adjunct system to gain an advantage, it’s the kind of thing every defensive coordinator is looking to snuff out as quickly as possible. Getting embarrassed on a repeat basis by a “high school” offense doesn’t look good on your resume. “You can just never have a good call,” Eagles defensive coordinator Jim Schwartz said. “You can have a defense that’s great against the run, and they have a run called, and the quarterback pulls the ball and throws it. So, it really takes away the play-calling a little bit from the defense. If you have something that’s really good against the pass, and the quarterback sees it, he can just hand the ball off. If you have something that makes it very difficult to run the ball, he can keep the ball and end up throwing it. It’s just another layer—you add the RPO along with read-option stuff; it’s made it really difficult for defenses. You have to have multi-dimensional players and you have to be sound straight across the board. You have to defend the width of the field and the length of the field, run and pass, on every single play.”

As then-Patriots defensive coordinator Matt Patricia noted to me a couple days before the Eagles beat New England for their first Super Bowl title and Foles threw three touchdown passes and caught another from tight end Trey Burton, Philly’s use of the RPO allowed Foles to put his mind at ease regarding easy yardage in crucial situations by reacting to—and exploiting—the empty part of the field laid bare by the unblocked defender. “The RPO is a small part of what they do,” Patricia said. “They do a lot, so you have to read your keys and be disciplined and handle all of it because it is going to change based on the down and distance and situation. We’ve got to defend everything they do, not one specific thing. It’s the combination that makes them so successful. They do a great job of understanding what you’re in defensively and putting their guys in position. They run great routes and they do a good job of what I’ll call ‘taking the profit.’ If someone is open right now, they’re going to get the ball out quick and let them run. As much as they can get the ball in the hands of their skillplayers in space and allow them to make plays, that’s what they’re going to do.”

The Eagles took a play concept from the high school and college ranks, dressed it up to beat opponents at the highest levels of the game, and deployed those innovative concepts when they would have otherwise been outgunned and outmanned. In the modern NFL, any coach, who doesn’t adopt that mind-set and thinks his precious system will magically take the NFL by storm any longer than it takes the rest of the league to figure it out, is halfway to his own professional execution. As the NFL progresses, imagination will be a key attribute. Adaptability will be an absolute necessity. And when you see a new scheme or concept infiltrate the league seemingly out of nowhere, you likely can assume that it was due to the desperation of one play-caller, and because of the genius of him and his staff, he was able to think outside the box and find a new way.

